The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

The Lancet Psychiatry Commission on youth mental health
Patrick D McGorry, Cristina Mei, Naeem Dalal*, Mario Alvarez-Jimenez, Sarah-Jayne Blakemore, Vivienne Browne, Barbara Dooley, Ian B Hickie,
Peter B Jones, David McDaid, Cathrine Mihalopoulos, Stephen J Wood, Fatima Azzahra El Azzouzi*, Jessica Fazio*, Ella Gow*, Sadam Hanjabam*,
Alan Hayes*, Amelia Morris*, Elina Pang*, Keerthana Paramasivam*, Isabella Quagliato Nogueira*, Jimmy Tan*, Steven Adelsheim,
Matthew R Broome, Mary Cannon, Andrew M Chanen, Eric Y H Chen, Andrea Danese, Maryann Davis, Tamsin Ford, Pattie P Gonsalves,
Matthew P Hamilton, Jo Henderson, Ann John, Frances Kay-Lambkin, Long K-D Le, Christian Kieling, Niall Mac Dhonnagáin, Ashok Malla,
Dorien H Nieman, Debra Rickwood, Jo Robinson, Jai L Shah, Swaran Singh, Ian Soosay, Karen Tee, Jean Twenge, Lucia Valmaggia,
Therese van Amelsvoort, Swapna Verma, Jon Wilson, Alison Yung, Srividya N Iyer†, Eóin Killackey†

Executive Summary
Mental ill health, which has been the leading health and
social issue impacting the lives and futures of young
people for decades, has entered a dangerous phase.
Accumulating research evidence indicates that in many
countries, the mental health of emerging adults has been
declining steadily over the past two decades, with a major
surge of mental ill health driven by the COVID-19
pandemic, the measures taken to contain it, and its
aftermath. This alarming trend signals a warning that
global megatrends (major, long-lasting societal changes
such as environmental, social, economic, political, or
technological changes) and changes in many societies
around the world in the past two decades have harmed
the mental health of young people and increased mental
ill health among them.
Mental illnesses have a peak age of onset of 15 years,
with 63–75% of onsets occurring by age 25 years, which
represents the epidemiological inverse of physical
illnesses. Unless treated effectively, mental illnesses are a
major cause of premature death from physical illness
and suicide. Even when these illnesses do not cause
death, they are the largest and most rapidly growing
cause of disability and lost human potential and
productivity across the lifespan. In 2011, the World
Economic Forum reported that among the noncommunicable diseases, mental illness was the largest
source of loss of gross domestic product (GDP) globally.
These human impacts and economic losses largely stem
from the timing of their onset in life, combined with
worldwide neglect of mental illness due to stigma and
discrimination within health care and medical research.
Mental illness has been described as a scandal and a
form of self-harm inflicted by society upon itself.
Encouraging signs suggest that the danger is being
sensed and some responses are emerging. The US
Surgeon General has labelled the deteriorating situation a
youth mental health crisis and is formulating strategies to
combat it in the USA. However, the crisis is global and
demands forensic analysis of the megatrends and the
malleable risk and protective factors that are influencing it,
and a global strategy that can catalyse national and local
action plans to counter it. The cohesion and prosperity of
societies around the world are at risk and not limited to
health outcomes alone. The concept of mental wealth has
been formulated to capture the enormous potential
benefits that could flow from better promotion of mental

health and wellbeing, combined with early intervention
and high-quality treatment of young people with emerging
mental illness that is extended for as long as necessary.
With the recognition that the cost of modern health care is
becoming unsustainable, logic, rather than emotion, will
need to determine how finite resources are allocated.
Health care is already rationed in a covert fashion and,
worldwide, mental illness is affected most by this rationing.
The widespread delivery of low-value health care of many
kinds should be reconsidered in relation to the value
proposition of saving the lives and productive futures of
young people. The rising incidence of mental ill health in
young people makes continuing neglect of their needs
intolerable.

Part 1: The changing landscape of youth mental health
A new field of youth mental health is being created with a
focus on individuals aged 12–25 years. This Commission
examines the changing landscape and the underlying
megatrends influencing this change. The damage that
some of these megatrends, such as rising inter­
generational inequality, unregulated social media, wage
theft, insecurity of employment, and climate change, is
inflicting is deep and widespread within societies. The
highly correlated domains of distress, diagnosable
episodes of mental ill health with a need for care, and
more severe, sustained, or recurrent forms of mental
illness are at an all-time high. Young people are showing
the most serious warning signs and symptoms of a
society and a world that is in serious trouble.

Part 2: Conceptual frameworks and trajectories
To inform a new field of youth mental health, youthappropriate conceptual building blocks and perspectives
are needed, including new developmental thinking and
clinical staging. Mental health care for young people
(age 12–25 years) must be sensitive to this age group’s
specific biological, cognitive, social, and cultural
changes. The physical, cognitive, and behavioural
differences between young people and adults are likely
to influence the way mental health problems present,
and they indicate the need for different intervention
approaches.

Part 3: Models of care
The principles, core features, and strategies seen as
necessary for designing, testing, and scaling up new

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Lancet Psychiatry 2024;
11: 731–74
See Comment pages 671, 673,
and 674
*Youth Commissioner
†Joint senior authorship
Orygen, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia
(Prof P D McGorry MD PhD,
C Mei PhD,
Prof M Alvarez-Jimenez PhD,
V Browne BA, Prof S J Wood PhD,
E Gow BPubHealth&HealthProm,
Prof A M Chanen PhD,
M P Hamilton MSc,
Prof J Robinson PhD,
Prof L Valmaggia PhD,
Prof A Yung MD,
Prof E Killackey D Clin PSych);
Centre for Youth Mental
Health, The University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia (Prof P D McGorry,
C Mei, Prof M Alvarez-Jimenez,
V Browne, Prof S J Wood,
Prof A M Chanen, M P Hamilton,
Prof J Robinson,
Prof L Valmaggia, Prof A Yung,
Prof E Killackey); Lusaka,
Zambia (N Dalal MD MMed);
Department of Psychology,
University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK
(Prof S-J Blakemore PhD); School
of Psychology, University
College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
(Prof B Dooley PhD,
N Mac Dhonnagáin PhD); Brain
and Mind Centre, University of
Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
(Prof I B Hickie MD);
Department of Psychiatry,
University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK
(Prof P B Jones MD PhD,
Prof T Ford PhD); Care Policy
and Evaluation Centre,
Department of Health Policy,
London School of Economics
and Political Science, London,
UK (D McDaid MSc); Public
Health and Preventive
Medicine, Monash University,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia
(Prof C Mihalopoulos PhD,
M P Hamilton, L K-D Le PhD);
Monash University Health

731

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

middle-resource settings, specifically in terms of health
and health workforce resources and appetite and vision
for reform. This Commission includes authors from lowresource settings to formulate a staged approach to
building systems of care across settings. Strategies for
enhancing youth mental health systems will need to differ
between low-resource settings, where most of the world’s
young people live, and the highest-resource settings,
where nascent reforms remain insufficient. Improving
youth mental health is of the utmost importance given the
state of the world and how dependent societies are on the
capacities and contributions of their young people. As long
as adolescents and emerging adults are undervalued,
languishing in precarity, and denied respect and nurture,
society itself will become more precarious. The youth
mental health crisis is more than a warning; it might be
our last chance to take action.

Economics Group, School of
Public Health and Preventive
Medicine, Monash University,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia
(Prof C Mihalopoulos, L K-D Le);
School of Psychology,
University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK
(Prof S J Wood); Casablanca,
Morocco (F A El Azzouzi MSc);
Windsor, ON, Canada
(J Fazio BA); Jack.org, Toronto,
ON Canada (J Tan MD);
Melbourne, VIC, Australia
(E Gow, A Morris LLB BA);
Imphal, Manipoor, India
(S Hanjabam MPhil); Cork,
Ireland (A Hayes MSc); Hong
Kong Special Administrative
Region, China (E Pang BSocSc);
Singapore
(K Paramasivam BSocSc [Hons]);
Fortaleza, Brazil
(I Quagliato Nogueira MSc);
Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA, USA
(S Adelsheim MD); Institute for
Mental Health, University of
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
(Prof M R Broome PhD);
Birmingham Women’s and
Children’s NHS Foundation
Trust, Birmingham, UK
(Prof M R Broome); Department
of Psychiatry, RCSI University
of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Dublin, Ireland
(Prof M Cannon MD PhD);
Institute of Mental Health,
Singapore (Prof E Y H Chen MD,
S Verma MD); Lee Kong Chian
School of Medicine, Nanyang
Technological University,
Singapore (Prof E Y H Chen); LKS
School of Medicine, University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region,
China (Prof E Y H Chen); Social,
Genetic and Developmental
Psychiatry Centre
(Prof A Danese PhD), and
Department of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry
(Prof A Danese), Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology and
Neuroscience, King’s College
London, UK; National and
Specialist Child and Adolescent
Mental Health Service Clinic for
Trauma, Anxiety, and
Depression, South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation
Trust, London, UK
(Prof A Danese); Department of
Psychiatry, University of
Massachusetts Chan Medical
School, Worcester, MA, USA
(Prof M Davis PhD); Youth
Mental Health Group, Sangath,
New Delhi, India

models of youth mental health care are widely agreed on.
Integrated youth primary mental health care lies at the
heart of the needed reform, and many countries have laid
the foundations for this new approach to health care.
However, considerable barriers and gaps remain across
all resource settings, and particularly in low-resource
settings, which must be addressed.

732

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Parts 4 and 5: The economic and political imperative
This Commission also discusses perspectives on the
economic dimension of youth mental health and the
politics of reform. Youth mental health care, as well as
prevention and promotion provided in a timely and
proportional way, can be highly cost-effective. Imple­
mentation strategies have been created but require great
force and sophistication. To achieve transformational
reform, a combination of approaches, including strong
economic arguments, emotionally engaging storytelling,
real-world solutions, high-profile societal champions,
media support, and targeted campaigns are needed.
We have attempted to adopt an inclusive approach to this
global problem and recognise that much of the data and
practical reform has been limited to high-resource and
Panel 1: Methods and approach
The initial consultation meeting for this Commission
occurred in July, 2019. The meeting brought together experts
and researchers with expertise in youth mental health across
a range of specialties, including clinical psychology,
psychiatry, neuroscience, epidemiology, social science,
economics, and service reform, as well as young people from
a range of low-income, middle-income, and high-income
countries. Attendees were identified through international
networks such as the International Association for Youth
Mental Health, which links people from more than
60 different nations, and through literature searches. The
attendees participated in a range of discussions focused on
the overarching themes and outcomes of the Commission,
the inclusion of young people, and key information that
should be included or considered in each section of the
Commission. Attendees were from Australia, Europe, North
America, and Asia. The need to include a range of
perspectives during the development of the Commission was
acknowledged, and this is reflected in the authorship, which
includes young people with lived experience as youth
Commissioners and youth authors, as well as experts working
in or originally from low-resource settings.
The Commission provides a synthesis of evidence across
five key topics that are considered important by the authors
in formulating a blueprint to transform prevention and care
for young people at risk of or with mental illness. We have
used evidence from systematic reviews and meta-analyses
where available and appropriate and have cited publications
that we deemed relevant in capturing the current state of
knowledge across the five topics.

Part 1: The changing landscape of youth mental
health
Introduction

Mental ill health is an umbrella term that includes timelimited episodes of ill health with a need for care as well
as more sustained, recurrent, and variably more disabling
forms of ill health that the term mental illness tends to
capture. Mental ill health is a major threat to the lives
and futures of young people, and alarming evidence
suggests that its prevalence and impact are steadily
increasing in many high-resource settings where hard
data are available (panel 1).1–4 The US Surgeon General
has labelled the deteriorating situation a “youth mental
health crisis”4 and is formulating strategies to combat it
in the USA. Distress, alienation, and loneliness have also
increased steadily, and although these concerns might
not necessarily warrant a health service response, they
are a broader reflection of societal dysfunction that the
public health crisis of youth mental health represents.
Nearly three decades ago, with the retreat of the main
physical illnesses that had affected young people
throughout history until the second half of the
20th century, Michael Rutter5 highlighted that mental ill
health, or “psychosocial disorders”5 as he put it, were
now by far the principal cause of burden of disease in
many parts of the world.6 He noted that young people
had become physically more healthy than at any time in
history, largely due to the retreat of infectious disease,
but their mental health was worse than ever. Although
some environmental, economic, and lifestyle threats to
physical health are growing, the trend of deteriorating
mental health is more striking and has continued and
even accelerated over the past two decades.3 The
epidemiology of mental illness is unique, with the peak
onset of most mental illnesses occurring during the
transitional period from childhood to mature adulthood.7
This onset period is inextricably linked to the momentum
of complex and dramatic biopsychosocial change that
permeates and surrounds this transition.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

Emerging adulthood
The term emerging adulthood captures the scope and
direction of the developmental momentum during the
whole of this sensitive period from puberty through to
the mid-to-late twenties.8,9 This transition has expanded
in recent decades and can be argued to now incorporate
and transcend the constraints of the older term
adolescence. Emerging adulthood involves dramatic and
visible changes in biological maturity that are mirrored
by less outwardly visible changes in brain structure and
function, psychological development, and social and
vocational spheres. Developmental tasks include the
evolution of a stable sense of self, individuating from the
family of origin, establishing independence, and often
establishing a family of one’s own. This development is
daunting, even for the mentally well; stress, adversity,
risk, uncertainty, and loss are constant and necessary
companions within the ecosystem of growth. Such
developmental challenges are increasingly complex and
protracted, and concern is growing that a series of
megatrends that have arisen over the past two decades
are harming the mental health of children and young
people in transition to adulthood. A number of such
trends have been observed, including changes in the
social construction of the transition to adulthood; the
extension of education and the lifespan; the later average
age of marriage and childbirth; a new raft of destabilising
social, technological, and economic changes in society
including globalisation, neoliberalism, and consequent
rising inequality; the rise of the smartphone and
unregulated social media;10,11 pressure to achieve
academically;12 challenges of artificial intelligence to
future educational and occupational expectations; serious
erosion of the rights of younger workers; and climate
change.13–16 These trends differ in extent across the globe
but have been validated by the voices of young people
and examined recently by Twenge,17 Duffy,18 and
Pennington,14 among others. Evidence suggests delayed
onset of sexual activity, delayed and reduced use of
alcohol and illicit drugs except in marginalised groups,
and a trend to slower maturation, including if and when
economic independence is attained.15,19,20 Although
commonalities are preserved across generations, being a
young person navigating the transition to mature
adulthood today is very different than it was even 20 years
ago.15,21,22 These trends have been defined, and much of
the data indicating a serious decline in the mental health
of young people has been collected in western, educated,
industrialised, rich, and democratic (WEIRD) nations or
high-income countries (HICs), although globalisation
means that such trends might be or become equally
relevant in the rest of the world, including in low-income
and middle-income countries (LMICs) where the
majority of children and young people are growing up.3
Mental ill health emerging during youth typically
disrupts development and maturation, undermining
the attainment of key milestones including identity and

relationship formation, educational and vocational
attainment, financial independence, and culturally
appropriate personal autonomy.23,24 Key demographic
and socioeconomic changes have amplified this threat,
transforming it into what has been termed a perfect
storm.25 Childhood mortality has fallen dramatically
over the past century, the birth rate has decreased, and
life expectancy has increased globally. These trends
contribute to increasing the dependence of society on
the health and productivity of young people. In nonWEIRD low-resource and middle-resource countries the
mean age of the population is usually much younger
than in WEIRD high-resource countries; for instance,
the UN estimated the mean age of the population of
sub-Saharan Africa to be 18·7 years in 2020 and that the
birth rate and life expectancy will have fallen as a result
of the COVID-19 pandemic,26 albeit temporarily. In
comparison, the mean age in Italy was 45·7 years
in 2020.27 Although the age dependency ratio is
decreasing in non-WEIRD countries, the reverse is
occurring in WEIRD nations.28
More than ever, premature death and disability need to
be prevented or reduced in young people to enable them
to shoulder the financial and social burden of the
dependent older population. Particularly in WEIRD
nations with ageing populations, the loss of productivity
wrought by preventable, untreated, or poorly treated
mental ill health in young people cannot be afforded.
In non-WEIRD low-resource and middle-resource
countries, young people represent a much larger
proportion of the population and are an abundant,
vibrant resource upon whose contributions and
development the prospects of entire nations are
dependent. Furthermore, as pointed out by Moffit and
Caspi in 2019,25 mental ill health in young people is a
potent yet largely ignored risk factor for age-related
medical illnesses later in life. Hence, effective prevention
and treatment of mental ill health in youth will ultimately
help to reduce the total burden of disease over the life
course, making it one of the best investments in health
and social policy reform, as the potential return on
investment is enormous.29

The threat of mental ill health to young people
Mental ill health is the primary threat to the health,
wellbeing, and productivity of young people who are
in transition from childhood to mature adulthood.
Improvements in global childhood mortality have shifted
the main period of health risk from before puberty to the
mid-twenties; mental ill health now accounts for at least
45% of the overall burden of disease in those aged
10–24 years.6 Globally, mental disorders are among the
leading causes of disability among this age group.30–32
Suicide is the leading cause of death among people aged
15–44 years in Australia,33 people aged 15–19 years in New
Zealand,34 and people aged 15–39 years in India.35 Suicide
is also the second leading cause of death among people

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

(P P Gonsalves PhD); School of
Psychology, University of
Sussex, Brighton, UK
(P P Gonsalves); Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health,
Toronto, ON, Canada
(Prof J Henderson PhD);
Department of Psychiatry,
University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada (Prof J Henderson);
Swansea University Medical
School, Swansea University,
Swansea, UK (Prof A John PhD);
Hunter Medical Research
Institute, Newcastle, NSW,
Australia
(Prof F KayLambkin PhD);
Department of Psychiatry,
School of Medicine,
Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre,
Brazil (Prof C Kieling MD PhD);
Hospital de Clínicas de Porto
Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil
(Prof C Kieling); Department of
Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine
and Health Sciences, McGill
University, Montréal, QC,
Canada (Prof A Malla MBBS,
J L Shah MD FRCPC,
Prof S N Iyer PhD); ACCESS Open
Minds and Prevention and
Early Intervention Program for
Psychosis, Douglas Mental
Health University Institute,
Verdun, QC, Canada
(Prof A Malla, J L Shah,
Prof S N Iyer); Amsterdam
University Medical Centers,
location AMC, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands (D H Nieman PhD);
Faculty of Health, University of
Canberra, Canberra, ACT,
Australia
(Prof D Rickwood PhD);
headspace National Youth
Mental Health Foundation,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia
(Prof D Rickwood); Mental
Health and Wellbeing, Warwick
Medical School, University of
Warwick and Coventry and
Warwickshire Partnership
Trust, Coventry, UK
(Prof S Singh DM); Department
of Psychological Medicine,
Faculty of Medical and Health
Sciences, University of
Auckland, Auckland, New
Zealand (I Soosay MBChB);
Foundry, Providence Health
Care, Vancouver, BC, Canada
(K Tee PhD); Department of
Psychology, San Diego State
University, San Diego,
California, USA
(Prof J Twenge PhD);
Department of Psychology,
Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology and Neuroscience,
King’s College London, London,

733

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

National Study of Mental
Heath and Wellbeing
(Australia)

Mental Health of Children ALSPAC and Danish National Health
Survey (Denmark)
and Young People Survey MCS (UK)
(England)

Youth Risk Behavior
Survey (USA)

National Survey of Drug Use and Health
(USA)

Clinically
relevant
emotional
symptoms
(17 years
of age)

Persistent feelings of
sadness or hopelessness
(high school students*)

12-month major depressive episode
(12–17 years of age)

12-month mental disorder Probable mental disorder
(16–24 years of age)
(17–19 years of age)

100

Poor mental health
(16–24 years of age)

60
50
40
30
20
10

†

19

4

21
20

20

21
†

20
0

19

20

1

04

20

20

11

20
2

20

21

11

20

21

20

10

20

21

22
in
Bo 199
1–
rn
92
in
20
00
–0
2
20
10

17

20

22

20

17

Bo
rn

Young
women

20

–2
2

Young
men

20

07

20
20

20
–

20
0

20

20

22

0
7

Prevalence of mental disorders (%)

Despite this compelling evidence of need, only a small
minority of young people can access adequate care even
in high-resource settings,46–48 and primary forms of
prevention are daunting, elusive, and typically a very
low priority. In low-resource and middle-resource
settings, availability and access to mental health services
for young people are grossly inadequate.49 These settings
often have low rates of recognition and treatment of
mental disorders50 and a paucity of data on the
prevalence of mental disorders.51 Poverty, armed conflict,
violence, displacement, and environmental stressors
and disasters tend to be endemic in these settings
and contribute to substantial psychiatric morbidity,
particularly depression, anxiety, and conduct-related
difficulties.52
The neglect of youth mental health can be partly ascribed
to the stigma-based neglect of mental health worldwide.53
This neglect is amplified by the perverse and self-defeating
ambivalence that society continues to display towards
young people and their needs.18,54 Insufficient action on
climate change, an unregulated and unsafe digital world
and social media environment, and social exclusion as
reflected by insecure employment, reduced access to
affordable housing, and intergenerational inequality have
combined to create a bleak present and future for young
people in many countries.55–58 These harmful megatrends

20

Correspondence to:
Prof Patrick McGorry, Orygen,
Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia
pat.mcgorry@orygen.org.au

aged 15–34 years in Canada36 and people aged 10–14 years
and 25–34 years in the USA.37 Worldwide, trends are
variable. Although suicide rates are higher and are
continuing to increase modestly for men and boys than for
women and girls, in many countries rates are increasing
more rapidly in young women than in young men.38,39
Suicide remains the fourth most common cause of death
for those aged 15–29 years globally.40 Suicide rates in
adolescent males increased in Brazil between 2001
and 2015;41 however, the Global School-based Student
Health Survey showed that rates of self-harm and suicide
attempts might have been decreasing in children aged
12–15 years in 12 LMICs until 2017.42 Indigenous young
people in many countries (eg, Australia, Canada, the USA,
and India) have substantially higher rates of suicide than
the general population.43 Furthermore, mental disorders
and self-harm are increasingly common during this
transition, with onset peaking at age 15 years44 and at least
50% of emerging adults developing a threshold disorder
with a need for care by age 25 years.23,45 A recent systematic
review and meta-analysis studied the proportions from
192 epidemiological studies of 708 561 individuals who had
onset of any mental disorder.7 By ages 14, 18, and 25 years,
the proportions were 34·6%, 48·4%, 62·5% of the total,
respectively, emphasising the burden of mental ill health
in young people.7

20

UK (Prof L Valmaggia);
Department of Psychiatry and
Neuropsychology, Maastricht
University, Maastricht, The
Netherlands
(Prof T van Amelsvoort MD PhD);
Norfolk and Suffolk NHS
Foundation Trust, Norwich, UK
(J Wilson MBChB); Institute for
Mental and Physical Health and
Clinical Translation, Deakin
University, Geelong, VIC,
Australia (Prof A Yung); School
of Health Sciences, The
University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK (Prof A Yung)

Young
men

Young ALSPAC MCS
women

Young
men

Young
women

Young
men

Young
women

Young
men

Young
women

Figure 1: Youth mental health trends by country and sex
Measures used were the National Study of Mental Health and Wellbeing: WHO’s Composite International Diagnostic Interview, version 3.0;59 Mental Health of
Children and Young People Survey: Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire;60 ALSPAC and MCS: Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (emotional subscale; trends
by sex unavailable);61 the Danish National Health Survey: 12-Item Short Form Health Survey, version 2;62 the Youth Risk Behavior Survey (survey item: “during the past
12 months, did you ever feel so sad or hopeless almost every day for two weeks or more in a row that you stopped doing some usual activities?”);63 the National
Survey on Drug Use and Health (which measures the nine symptoms associated with major depressive episode as defined in the DSM-5);64 and survey questions
adapted from the depression section of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication Adolescent Supplement.65 ALSPAC=Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and
Children. MCS=Millennium Cohort Study. *Here, high school students are in grades 9–12, aged approximately 14–18 years. †2021 estimates are not comparable with
estimates from 2019 and earlier, as 2021 estimates are based on multimode data collection and estimates from 2019 and earlier are based on in-person data
collection alone.

734

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

that have emerged over the past two decades reflect little
concern or support for young people, and have undermined
their economic security and hope for the future. In many
LMICs, these megatrends might be greatly overshadowed
by more immediate threats to survival, such as war,
conflict, severe poverty, and insufficient food security and
shelter, which powerfully affect not only physical health,
but also mental health.

The global youth mental health crisis
Monitoring trends in mental ill health requires robust
epidemiological strategies and evidence, which to date
have mainly been available in HICs.30,32 Such trends are
unlikely to show linearity or the same pattern for different
age groups, countries, or forms of psychopathology;
however, in many WEIRD nations where epidemiological
trends are being accurately mapped, youth mental health
has been deteriorating over the past decade or more1
(figure 1). Long before the COVID-19 pandemic, substantial
evidence indicated that young people were facing rising
rates of mental ill health, including anxiety, depressive
symptoms, psychological distress, self-harm, and suicide,
with increases beginning in the early 2010s.4,59,66–69 In the
UK, emotional problems are emerging earlier in the
lifespan and showing a trend towards increasing
prevalence as indicated in a study comparing two cohorts a
decade apart.70 More alarmingly, the recent national study
of mental health and wellbeing in Australia (2020–22)
showed a 50% increase in prevalence of diagnostic-level
mental disorders in people aged 16–24 years since 2007,
reaching an annual prevalence rate of 39% in 2020–22,
which reached nearly 50% in young women.59 On the basis
of face-to-face interviews and classified according to the
ICD-10, this large, nationally representative study showed
that the 12-month prevalence rates of anxiety, affective, and
substance use disorders in people aged 16–24 years were
32%, 14%, and 7·8%, respectively (other diagnoses, such
as eating and psychotic disorders, were not assessed).59
In 2007, the respective rates were 15%, 6%, and 13%
(figure 1).71 US data on suicide and self-harm can be found
in the appendix (p 14).
The adverse effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on youth
mental health is a global trend, occurring across resource
and income levels,72 and the treatment gap widens across
that spectrum. Although some studies conducted early in
the pandemic did not report this trend,73,74 young people
as a cohort have had a marked increase in distress and
disproportionately poorer mental health outcomes since
the COVID-19 pandemic,75–80 especially those living with
social and economic disadvantage.81 Although some
surveys have noted an improvement in mental health
among young people following a decline at the start of
the pandemic, psychological distress remains more
prevalent than it was before the pandemic.82
In low-resource settings, the prevalence and time
trends of mental illness and related dimensions such as
loneliness vary, as shown in various recent studies.83–86 A

2021 systematic review of 51 studies of the prevalence of
mental health problems in sub-Saharan adolescents
showed high rates of mental health need, particularly in
vulnerable populations such as those affected by HIV
and those in post-conflict settings.87 The prevalence of
common mental disorders in children and young people
in Blantyre, Malawi’s finance and commercial centre,
appears similar to the prevalence reported by studies
from WEIRD settings with similar socioeconomic risk
factors.88 Malawi has developed public mental health
policies, including ambitious and targeted unconditional
cash transfers to ultra-poor households in order to
improve youth mental health, an intervention that shows
promise.89 Epidemiological studies using rigorous
methods have shown substantial need in disadvantaged
populations in Lebanon,90 in urban and peri-urban
youth in Zimbabwe,91 and in children attending schools
in Nepal.92 The consequences of this situation are
enormous, impacting young people, their families and
community, and the economy at local, national, and
global levels. Outcomes for young people in low-resource
and middle-resource settings might be worse than for
previous generations; however, systematic monitoring of
youth mental health trends in low-resource and middleresource settings is relatively insufficient compared with
high-resource settings.93
Some people have questioned whether the widespread
rise in the prevalence of mental disorders has been
inflated through a widening of the boundaries of
diagnostic criteria of mental ill health and by overzealous
or ill-conceived mental health awareness programmes,
including via unregulated social media platforms such as
TikTok.94–96 These factors might have led to the inclusion
of a cohort of young people who have transient or selflimiting distress and might not necessarily have a need
for care. A related critique in support of this so-called
prevalence inflation hypothesis suggests that some of the
studies indicating high rates of need rely too heavily on
self-report and screening instruments that are then used
to determine caseness through crosswalks, which are
intended to create valid estimates of disorder.96 However,
this crosswalk is an accepted research technique, and key
studies using robust interview-based methods confirm
that the major rise in prevalence is largely real and
sustained.59 Greater awareness of mental ill health might
contribute to rising rates either by facilitating help
seeking or by artificially inducing distress through a form
of contagion that might not in fact need care.94 Frances, in
his polemic Saving Normal, something of a mea culpa for
his role in the expansion of diagnostic criteria as Editorin-Chief of the DSM-IV process, sought to set much
narrower boundaries.97 In Foulkes’ 2021 book and other
work, she posed the question of whether, in addition to
leading to better detection and reporting of previously
unrecognised symptoms and need for care, mental health
awareness and universal mental health intervention in
schools might have harmful impacts, including a form of

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

See Online for appendix

735

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

contagion effect, which can also occur via social media.94–96
Although a recent trial did not support mindfulness as
a universal intervention in schools for the primary
outcomes of risk for depression, social–emotional–
behavioural functioning, and wellbeing,98 other studies of
school-based interventions have reported benefits in
reducing the number of suicide attempts and severe
suicidal ideation,99 and promoting resilience in children
exposed to adverse childhood experiences.100 The evidence
for universal interventions is generally weak, but
conducting studies with a large enough sample size and
consequently sufficient power to detect the very small
effect sizes that are achievable if the interventions do
work is challenging.101
Although more research might clarify whether there is a
contagion effect elevating distress, well intentioned yet
naive awareness raising can be viewed as irresponsible
when it is linked with dilute universal wellbeing pro­
grammes in school settings and active screening, in the
absence of accessible skilled mental health care for those
young people who have already manifested clear mental
ill health. Particularly in the light of evidence from
methodologically sound, interview-based community
surveys that the rise in prevalence and need for care is both
real and substantial, a negligent, or worse, a denialist
response would be unacceptable and harmful.4,59,66,67,78,102
The great modern paradox is that the risk of physical
illnesses in young people is substantially reduced
compared with past eras, and at the same time, young
people show unprecedented rates of distress, mental ill
health, and mental illness. The erosion of their mental
health, alongside their shrinking social prospects and
precarious economic prospects, is beginning to convince
mainstream society of the urgent need to address this
global mental health crisis.

The hero’s journey
A key challenge is finding a way to respond to genuinely
increasing rates of mental ill health that justifies and
benefits from evidence-based care and does no harm
through labelling or stigmatising young people who are
transiently distressed, or through overtreatment. A
second and related challenge is how to ensure that youth
in need of mental health care can engage in this care in a
way that protects and enhances their sense of agency.
One well developed perspective that can be deployed is
positive psychology.103–106
A more fundamental and engaging version of this
idea was formulated by the philosopher Joseph Campbell,
who recognised the so-called hero’s journey as a common
theme across all cultures, with deep relevance to the
human condition.107 This theme is reflected in many
novels, plays, and movies. Perhaps the best known recent
examples are Star Wars and Harry Potter. The ubiquity of
the hero’s journey motif validates its relevance. The
idea has been used therapeutically, as a metaphor in
normalising our responses to the challenges and threats
736

that we all face during the struggle for maturity. Elements
of the hero’s journey concept, such as the call to
adventure (transition to adulthood), the road of trials
(struggles during this transition, often navigated with
help of an experienced older adult), achieving the goal
(actualised adult identity realisation of developmental
milestones), the return (adopting new adult roles within
one’s community), and the application (making a positive
social contribution), will make sense to most people.
This concept creates the space for a positive psychology
perspective, which is a strengths-based stance to distress
and struggle during the transition to adulthood, but one
with much greater popular resonance. The hero’s journey
also allows us to accept and see value in a soft border or
flexible boundary between mental health and mental ill
health during the struggle, enabling people with and
without a need for professional help to reframe their
experience. This perspective validates a role not only for
the scaffolding of the family and the social network
surrounding the young person, but also for mental
health professionals and the treatment of mental injury
and illness without these valid needs being perceived as
indicative of weakness.
Mental distress in response to stressful events reflects a
spectrum of underlying processes that current diagnostic
systems loosely place in three pragmatic categories: first,
a self-limited, non-pathological state (ie, acute stress
reaction); second, a time-limited state in which excessive
distress is reinforced by preoccupations (eg, adjustment
disorder), with increased risks of progression into the third
state, which is a pathological disorder that can persist
beyond the presence of stressors (eg, major depressive
disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder). Initial adaptive
stress responses can trigger cascades of changes in
networks of symptoms, brain circuits, or molecular
pathways that can become entrenched and self-sustaining.
The conceptual blurring between pathological and
subclinical states when external stressors are persistent
might increase the use of the so-called disorder perspective.
The attached stigma might inadvertently impede help
seeking, which is often already compromised. Instead,
when population events play a decisive causal role, the
concept of psychological injury would be more fitting,
when the source of the condition is rightly relocated from
the individual to the environment.
Seeing things from this perspective can allow the
transcendence of polarising and typically unproductive
debates concerning labelling and overdiagnosis. The latter
debates concerning overdiagnosis have not recognised the
routine neglect of the need for care, the importance of
context, and how a more permeable mindset enables the
crucial strategy of early intervention. The hero’s journey
concept thus navigates the space between the concern
about labelling common experiences as abnormal and
valuing the crucial need for help and support, including
expert medical and professional help, but it has not yet
been mobilised for routine therapeutic use. Finally,

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

although this concept confronts and accepts the extent of
the threats and challenges within the journey as well as the
possibility of defeat, it maintains the hope of ultimate
success even in the darkest times. In this way, it illustrates
that resilience, defined by Masten as the “capacity of a
dynamic system to adapt successfully to disturbances that
threaten system function, viability, or development”,108
rather than being an a priori quality, actually emerges from
facing inevitable adversity during the journey to adulthood.
By highlighting the key role of cultural resources,
supportive environments, and mentorship, including
professional help, the traditional one-dimensional and
individualistic nature of the popular concept of resilience,
which often means young people tend to be blamed for
failure and mental ill health, is enriched.109 The hero’s
journey is also compatible with the concept of posttraumatic growth.110 The hope that this concept nurtures is
a crucial element in any effective approach to the mental
health care of young people. Haidt11 has similarly argued
that the related concept of antifragility111 applies to the
development of children and adolescents. He states that
children need to be exposed to setbacks and failures in
order to be able to develop strengths and resilience;
however, the reality is substantially more complex,
with both underlying vulnerabilities and the potency
and duration of social and environmental stressors
influencing whether or not such exposures are healthpromoting and consistent with an antifragile effect, or
whether (such as with persistent bullying) they can be toxic
and even fatal.

Part 2: Conceptual frameworks and trajectories
Introduction

As highlighted in Part 1, adolescence and emerging
adulthood can be defined as the period of life between
puberty and adult independence, approximately corre­
sponding to age 10–24 years.22 This is a period of profound
biological (hormonal and neural), psychological, and
social change. Sociocultural expectations of this age group
differ widely between (and even within) cultures and
countries; financial and social independence occurs much
earlier in some settings than in others. Nevertheless, the
development of behaviours typical of this phase, such as
risk taking and sensation seeking, is similar across
contexts.112 Emerging adulthood is also a vulnerable period
for the onset of mental illnesses: 63–75% of mental
illnesses first appear before the age of 25,7,45,113 with onset
during this period associated with greater duration of
illness and diversity of comorbid disorders.45 Furthermore,
the physical, cognitive, and behavioural differences
between young people and adults are likely to influence
the way mental health problems present, and they
therefore require different approaches for interventions.
The shifting socioeconomic conditions of the past two
decades have added another dimension to understanding
risk and protective factors in the onset and persistence of
mental ill health. Here, we consider the range of

perspectives relevant to understanding the genesis,
complexity, pattern, and scale of mental ill health in young
people.

Biological perspective
The start of traditional adolescence and emerging
adulthood is puberty, which results in reproductive
maturity. Evidence suggests that the increase in sex
hormones at puberty plays a role in brain development,114–117
social outcomes,118 and mental health.119–121
Extensive research using brain imaging has shown that
the human brain undergoes substantial and protracted
development across adolescence.122 Research studies
using MRI have shown structural brain development
that is marked by a decline in cortical grey matter volume
from late childhood to the mid-twenties, and a gradual
increase in cerebral white matter volume between
childhood and mid-adulthood.123,124 These changes in the
brain’s macrostructure, as observed in MRI scans, are
proposed to correspond to microstructural developmental
processes, including the development of axons and the
reorganisation of synapses. These processes are crucial
for brain development, are mechanisms of neuro­
plasticity, and are dependent partly on genetics, the
environment, and the interaction between the two.125
Different brain regions develop at different rates
(appendix p 10)124,126 and mature at different ages.127,128 For
example, on average, subcortical regions involved in
emotion and reward processing develop earlier than
prefrontal regions involved in decision making and selfregulation, although this pattern differs between
individuals.129,130

Social and cognitive perspective
Substantial changes in social exposure and orientation
take place during adolescence, as more time is spent with
peers than with family,131–134 the influence of friends or
peers increases, and the influence of parents or adults
decreases (appendix p 11).135,136 Adolescents are particularly
sensitive to peer rejection137–139 and social approval.140 The
heightened susceptibility to social influence in adolescence,
combined with increased concern about social rejection,
increases the likelihood that adolescents will conform to
their peers in order to gain social acceptance and avoid the
social risk of being excluded by their peer group.141–143
At the same time, cognitive skills such as planning,
future thinking, inhibiting inappropriate behaviour,
emotion regulation, decision making, and particular
forms of memory continue to improve during
adolescence (figure 2).144–149 Mentalisation, the ability to
understand other people’s minds and emotions, and the
ability to take another person’s perspective are still
developing.150,151 These cognitive advances, at a time when
the body, brain, and social environment are changing,
provide adolescents with the cognitive machinery to
reflect on themselves, their place in the social hierarchy,
and their futures.

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

737

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

A

B
Luna
NCANDA
NKI
PNC
AII

4
Executive function latency (adult Z score)

Executive function accuracy (adult Z score)

1

0

–1

–2

–3

3

2

1

0

–4
10

15

20
25
Age (years)

30

35

–1

10

15

20
25
Age (years)

30

35

Figure 2: Developmental trajectory of executive function across datasets and tasks in adolescence
Accuracy (A) and latency (B) composite from four datasets: Luna (N=196; 666 total visits), NCANDA (N=831; 3412 total visits), NKI (N=588), and PNC (N=9151).
Each measure within each dataset is Z scored to the performance of adults (participants aged 20–30 years). NCANDA=National Consortium on Alcohol and
Neurodevelopment in Adolescence. NKI=Nathan Kline Institute—Rockland Sample. PNC=Philadelphia Neurodevelopmental Cohort. Figure reproduced from
Tervo-Clemmens et al.144

The boundaries between biological, cognitive, social,
and cultural changes are not clearly defined. The
biological changes at puberty lead to changes in
appearance, and this results in young people being
treated differently by society and those around them. As
young people go through puberty, they are often given
more autonomy and responsibility, and are put under
increasing societal and social pressure to look and act
particular ways. At the same time, environmental input
affects the way the brain develops. For example, with
changing social expectations comes exposure to new
experiences, such as exposure to alcohol and other drugs,
which might in turn influence brain development.152
Entering into peer and intimate relationships is a key
feature of emerging adulthood and marks a shift from
an exclusive dependence on the family of origin. This
shift results in changes in the quality and strength of
the bonds with parents and siblings, and it can create
tensions and stress for everyone in the family. The
metaphorical scaffolding around the emerging adult is
crucial for the safe and successful navigation of this
developmental phase, but it constantly evolves.153,154 If
this scaffolding is fragile or crumbles, a risk for mental
ill health is posed. Conversely, mental ill health, and
especially sustained mental illness, can severely
damage this scaffolding, causing tensions within the
family and causing the peer network to diminish or
even collapse. Positive mentoring relationships beyond
the family and surrogate peer relationships can mitigate
these effects.5 The development of a sense of self and
identity beyond that of a dependent child is a key
developmental task.
One aspect of this developmental stage is sexual and
gender identity. Although LGBTIQA+ sexual identity and
738

diversity is much more accepted in some countries than
in others, much progress can still be made. The
prevalence of mental ill health and suicidal risk is
substantially higher in LGBTIQA+ and gender-diverse
young people compared with their non-LGBTIQA+ and
non-gender-diverse peers.155–157 The number of young
people identifying as gender diverse has substantially
increased in in the past decade,158 but controversy has
arisen within the medical and psychiatric fields as to how
to understand and respond to this trend, including the
reasons for and source of the increase.159 Regrettably, this
issue risks becoming drawn into ideological culture
wars, undermining a scientific and human rights
approach to health care generally.

Cultural factors
Cultural factors, and especially the sociocultural landscape
that young people grow up in, influence the expression of
youth mental health, and can include such diverse factors
as religion, cultural traditions, technological change,
economic inequality, and future uncertainty. The
globalisation of cultural influences, mediated via the
digital revolution, social media, and the advent of powerful
influencers, might be diluting some more traditional
cultural factors. Nevertheless, moving beyond a
predominantly westernised approach to the discussion is
crucial160 because culture can provide a lens through which
to better understand how young people think about mental
health, whether they seek help for mental health problems,
and how young people and mental health professionals
interact with one another.161 Importantly, many of these
cultural influences can rapidly change, as has been the
case for digital communication and social media. Cultural
factors, including religion, can have a large influence on

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

the emergence, recognition, and interpretation of mental
ill health in young people. For example, evidence suggests
that one’s understanding of emotions is dependent on
one’s cultural background, that recognition of one’s own
and others’ emotions is better between members of the
same cultural group,162 and that perceiving and expressing
emotions is determined by the prevailing cultural
models.163 Furthermore, the development of these social
abilities is strongly influenced by culture via interactions
between genes, environment, behaviour, and the brain.164,165
Immigration and acculturation modify and complicate the
influence of cultural factors.166
Particularly among immigrant, racialised, marginalised,
and Indigenous youth,167 cultural connectedness and
strong or positive cultural identity help increase
resilience,168,169 self-esteem, self-efficacy, self-clarity,170,171 life
satisfaction, wellbeing, and mental health.167,170,171 Cultural
identity can also protect against suicide risk, depression,
problematic substance use, and other evidence of mental
ill health. Using data from 200 Indigenous communities
in British Columbia in Canada, Chandler and Lalonde172
showed that cultural continuity (eg, cultural facilities,
language, and governance) was strongly associated with
significantly lower suicide rates. Spiritual wellbeing has
been found to be protective against depression, but
negative religious coping (eg, feeling abandoned by God)
can negatively affect mental health.173
Culture also influences how risk factors interact with
social support and help-seeking behaviour to determine
youth mental health outcomes. Attitudes about mental
health services, such as receptivity to care, anticipated
and real negative consequences from others, selfconsciousness, and stigma tolerance, have been linked to
mental health help seeking and to the use of formal mental
health services. Mental health stigma is often more intense
in collectivistic communities compared with individualistic
communities.174 Non-White Americans often express
greater public stigma or self-stigma (or both) than White
American groups,173 tend to emphasise non-biomedical
interpretations of behavioural, emotional, and cognitive
problems, and are often critical of mental health services.175
Elsewhere, undergraduate students in Japan report greater
reluctance to seek professional help than those in the
USA.176 These intercultural differences result in variation
in the timing of help seeking and from whom that help is
sought. Furthermore, factors such as inadequate health
coverage in countries without universal, publicly funded
health care, culturally insensitive views by mental health
service providers, and the use of culturally inappropriate
screening measures and treatment approaches might also
serve as institutional barriers to care.177
Cultural differences help shape beliefs and perceptions
of mental health, and influence one’s decision to seek
help and one’s choice of a formal mental health provider.
Culture must be carefully considered in the identification,
development, and adaptation of appropriate prevention
and intervention strategies.178

Global political, socioeconomic, and structural
megatrends
The cultural, social, and cognitive perspectives discussed
here might have been evolving over recent generations,
but they are likely to be responding to other deeper and
more potent forces driving the youth mental health
crisis. A range of recent global megatrends can be
identified as candidates and targets for prevention.
Patel179 made a powerful argument from a human rights
perspective for the right to be protected from known
harms to mental health. He contends that these harms
are the result of policies that create and sustain a range of
structural forces that undermine mental health. This
argument echoes the work of Wilkinson and Pickett180 on
the impacts of inequality, including intergenerational
inequality and wealth transfer, violence of all kinds, the
marginalisation of many groups, displacement due to
war, conflict, and climate. Young people are uniquely
sensitive to prevailing social, political, and economic
conditions and structural forces, and the effects of these
factors influence mental health across the lifespan.
Although these forces are not new, major shifts and
megatrends have more severely impacted young people
than before, as the US Surgeon General recognised.4
Both natural and man-made global crises and disasters
(eg, earthquakes, wildfires, tsunamis, wars, conflict, and
economic depressions) are well known to be associated
with predictable harmful effects on the mental health of
the population; however, the present mental health crisis
appears to be heavily and selectively affecting young
people. We need to understand why, and formulate
policies to mitigate this impact. Patel’s robust stance179,181
suggests that the appetite for such an approach might be
growing: “It is not possible to act on the goal of mental
health as a universal human right without squarely
acknowledging how the policies that have contributed to
these powerful structural forces are intentional and
ideologically motivated. The colonial and neoliberal
economic policies that led to the devastation of
marginalised populations and environments, and to
grotesque levels of inequality, must be called out and
confronted. And, as with any human rights discourse, we
must acknowledge that such policies are, fundamentally,
an ideological and political choice.”179
Four decades of neoliberalism have resulted in what
has been termed precarity, resulting in a growing section
of society termed the precariat.182 In WEIRD countries at
least, this political and economic megatrend that began
in the 1980s has produced rising intergenerational
inequality, a serious erosion of job security for young
people entering the workforce, wealth transfer from the
younger to the older generations, reduced prospects of
home ownership with the added insult of a rental
accommodation crisis, and rising student debt.14,183
Pennington,14 an Australian economist, describes the
subjective effects of these changes immediately after
finally securing a stable job: “I’d been deprived of the

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

739

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

ability to secure life’s basics. I’d been anxious, defensive
and sick for so long. That was all I knew. But with a stable
job for the first time in my life, I could feel my brain
being reconstituted… I gained agency over my life.”14
Pennington also analysed the economic forces resulting
from neoliberalism that are heavily implicated in the
harm caused to the mental health and wellbeing of young
people. Although conditions of work have sharply
declined and caused chronic insecurity and distress, the
proportion of young people not in employment,
education, and training is also substantially higher in
young people with mental ill health than in those
without, reflecting a circular problem.184 A related trend
that young people themselves frequently report is
academic pressure, which varies across and within
cultures.12,185,186 Many young people are consigned to a life
of precarity and marginalisation within the poverty trap
of welfare benefits. A caveat here is that these dynamics
and welfare systems are less evident in LMICs, where
most of the young people in the world actually live. The
data are not yet readily available to make a judgement.
Female

Regression coefficient

0·1

0

–0·1

–0·2

–0·3
Male

Regression coefficient

0·1

0

–0·1

–0·2

Developmentally congruent clinical frameworks

–0·3
10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

Age (years)

Figure 3: How social media use predicts life satisfaction in longitudinal data from 17 409 participants aged
10–21 years
Results from the cross-lagged path connecting estimated social media use to life satisfaction ratings 1 year later,
estimated through a random intercept cross-lagged panel model. Grey boxes indicate ages when the path became
significant (p<0·05) and increases in estimated social media use from expected amounts predicted a decrease in
life satisfaction ratings from expected amounts 1 year later. Figure reproduced from Orben et al.189

740

Climate change is a substantial existential concern for
young people. Young people will suffer most because
they will have to live through the climate crisis, and there
is an implicit pressure on young people to solve it, even
though political power does not rest with them. Recent
studies on ecoanxiety in young people show large
individual differences, but generally substantial climate
anxiety.187,188
Social media use increases dramatically in adolescence,
and this too might affect the way that the brain develops
and could contribute to social pressures, mental ill health,
and life satisfaction (figure 3).189,190 The evidence on social
media use in adolescence is still emerging, and so far
indicates a potentially potent role, but it also suggests the
relationship between social media and mental health is
complex and bidirectional.189,191 Although social media and
the rise of smartphones, which now permeate the
societies of young people in low-resource and middleresource settings,192 offer new avenues for prevention and
intervention, widespread and growing fears surround
their public health effect on youth mental health.10,17,56,68,193
Although the temporal association is strong, data from
longitudinal and well controlled experimental studies are
scarce. Nevertheless, many argue that action is urgently
needed to regulate this potential source of harm. Building
upon the work of Twenge,10,17 Haidt has argued strongly
for this issue to be taken much more seriously as a key
megatrend undermining the mental health of children
and young people.11 Similarly, the unprecedented
economic power of those who control this technical
revolution, the so-called cloud capitalists who currently
have no constraint, has been exposed in a recent work by
Varoufakis, and the adverse effects of these technologies
can be linked back to a deeper wave of economic and
neoliberal forces.194 Haidt and Twenge contend that
smartphones are the only change that can account for the
timing and pattern of the youth mental health crisis and
that urgent action is required on many geographical and
societal levels; however, despite the evidence they have
assembled, and the consensus among many political
leaders and the wider public, the makeup of causes is
likely to be vastly more complex. The issue risks becoming
unnecessarily polarised. Smartphones and social media
are likely to be merely one element, even if potent, in a
wider and more pervasive set of harmful megatrends that
are yet to be fully understood or tamed.18,56
Clinical frameworks in youth mental health, and their
use, need to reflect the state of constant evolution and flux
occurring within the biological, cognitive, and social
landscape outlined so far. These frameworks also need to
adopt a preventive and pre-emptive stance. The onset of
mental ill health in emerging adults is complex. Young
people commonly have a mixture of sleep disturbance,
motivational changes, anxiety, and mood dysregulation,
which influence each other in myriad ways, as emphasised

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

Microphenotypes
Macrophenotypes

y
ng s
easi
Incr

Stage 0 asymptomatic

om
mpt

Substance use
disorders

Stage 1a distress disorder

s
rity,
seve

Stage 1b distress disorder and subthreshold
specificity

y,
ficit
peci

Personality
disorder
Eating
disorders

Mood
disorders

Stage 2 first treated episode
Stage 3 recurrence or persistence

y
bilit
disa
and

by network theory.195 These experiences and behaviours
are influenced by individual differences in the develop­
ment of the self and interpersonal functioning, along with
social and cultural variation as to how they are understood
and communicated. Symptoms emerge and subside as
microphenotypes, which typically do not follow clear
trajectories to discrete diagnoses such as schizophrenia or
bipolar disorder; early-phase conditions have pluripotential
(multiple end-stage) outcomes, and heterotypy (shifts
across diagnostic categories) and syndromal comorbidity
are the norm rather than the exception.45 The need for care
precedes the emergence of a traditional diagnostic picture
or late macrophenotypes.196 This approach contradicts
longstanding assumptions that mental disorders
constitute stable categorical entities whose form is
retained from initial onset to later, more stable
presentation, and it also highlights the limitation of
current diagnostic systems, which are likely to reify
artificial endpoints of developmental trajectories.
These patterns of emergence underline an urgent need
for novel approaches to define disorders, caseness, and the
need for care in young people. Transdiagnostic models197,198
recognise the fluid nature of mental illness in this age
group and make a distinction between early clinical stages
(which are assumed to have low rates of progression to
severe, persistent, or recurrent disorders) and later stages
(which are characterised by high rates of persistence,
impairment, and disease extension).199 Clinical
staging197,200–203 is one such emerging heuristic framework,
which allows the boundary between health and illness to
be defined and managed such that interventions can be
proportional to need and overdiagnosis, overtreatment,
and undertreatment can be minimised.200,202–205 Clinical
staging, with its longitudinal perspective, is congruent and
synergistic with many developmental and related
conceptual frameworks, and it allows the exploration of
mechanisms that underpin the onset and course of mental
ill health (figure 4). This framework places people along a
multidimensional continuum of health to illness,
capturing elements of risk, onset, course, and prognosis.
Staging frameworks can also guide preventive or
therapeutic interventions: less intensive approaches being
appropriate at earlier stages and interventions with a
higher risk to benefit ratio being reserved for later stages.
In addition to their differing symptom presentations
and stages of illness, which are often moderated by their
developmental stage, young people require very different
approaches to care and cultures of care based on their
developmental stage. For example, the needs of someone
aged 19 years with recent onset of illness are radically
different than those of someone aged 45 years with
longstanding and disabling illness in terms of
psychosocial support; approach to psychopharmacology;
medical needs; educational, vocational and employment
assistance; family support; and hope and optimism for
recovery. Such patients should not be mixed in residential
or community care. Clinical services (and the entire

Stage 4 treatment resistance

Psychotic disorder or
schizophrenia

Figure 4: Heuristic clinical staging model for mental disorders
The model illustrates clusters of early symptoms (microphenotypes) and their potential progression into clear, and
often comorbid, syndromes (macrophenotypes). Progression across stages is characterised by increasing symptom
severity, specificity, and disability (represented by sphere size). Spheres and colours represent phenotypes. Adapted
from McGorry and Mei206 with permission.

mental health system more broadly) therefore need to
reflect not only differing sets of needs, and the crucial
need for realistic optimism and hope, but also how
services are delivered: available at times that suit a young
person’s lifestyle, and in a setting that is welcoming,
holistic, and not narrowly clinical.29,207–209
Together, these concepts and approaches can set the
scene for the development of mental health care for
young people that is fit for purpose through being
sensitive to their specific needs and focused on providing
a continuum of high-quality interventions that facilitate
recovery and prevent persistent impairment.

Part 3: Models of care

The origins and status of contemporary mental health
care
Mental health care around the world has been
characterised by severe misunderstanding, prejudice,
and neglect, which sadly continue to this day.210 Only
2% of health budgets globally are devoted to mental
health care211 and, even in the richest countries, less than
half of the need is addressed. Quality of mental health
care lags well behind that found in physical health care.212
People with a range of mental illnesses die 15–20 years
earlier than the general population,213 primarily from
physical morbidity, and the seeds of this premature
mortality are sown from the onset of illness and often
even before that. Suicide is also much more prevalent in
those with mental illness than in the general population,214
representing a major source of preventable premature
death that remains a low priority in all regions of the
world. Many physical non-communicable diseases that
have a smaller effect on the health and wealth of society
than mental ill health due to their much later timing in
life remain a substantially higher priority in health
budgets, primarily for political and emotional reasons,
notwithstanding diminishing returns.

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

741

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

The neglect of mental illness as a major source of
preventable premature deaths has been described as a
scandal.215 Until recently, most societies only responded to
severe forms of adult mental illness and did so through
the 19th century asylum model, which was a humane
improvement when it began.216,217 A global wave of
deinstitutionalisation has removed this model from many,
but not all, HICs with the goal of integrating mental health
care with physical health care. Unfortunately, this reform
has failed in many respects. A successful outcome of the
dramatic reduction in residential hospital care, which was
the hallmark of deinstitutionalisation, was wholly
dependent upon the creation and growth of a well designed
and well funded ecosystem model of community-based
health care, stable and secure housing, and financial
security to replace the old asylums.218 This outcome did not
occur systematically in any HIC, and cramped and poorly
designed general hospital inpatient units and emergency
rooms have generally been overwhelmed and unable to
provide humane, evidence-based care.219,220 The new adult
systems continue to be largely restricted to middle-aged
and older adults with persistent and disabling illnesses,
meaning that only younger people who display extreme
problems or risk, or those who have a record of chronic
disability, are able to secure even a time-limited tenure of
care. We do not suggest that poor access to inpatient or
residential care for young people is the biggest flaw of the
post-institutional era; instead, we argue that the failure to
assemble modern systems of community-based care that
offer early intervention and evidence-based care has
created the systemic dysfunction, unnecessary suffering,
and widespread unmet need that now exists.
In parallel, child and adolescent psychiatry emerged as a
stream of care in mostly HICs; however, this field is
sparsely funded within already under-resourced mental
health-care systems. In low-resource and middleresource settings, child and adolescent mental health
services scarcely exist, except perhaps to an extent in
high-resource segments within these countries. Even in
the highest-resourced countries, these services are
overwhelmed, with only a small percentage of children
and adolescents able to gain any access to care.221 Studies
have confirmed that even when care is accessed from
child and adolescent mental health services, few patients
make a successful transition to adult mental health
services, because this transition is to traditional older
adult models of care that are not personalised to the
clinical and developmental needs of the young
person.222,223 For example, the TRACK study in the UK
highlighted the damaging gap in care between the upper
boundary of child psychiatry at age 16–18 years and the
lower boundary of adult psychiatry at age 18 years,
defined by educational and legal parameters rather than
health or developmental needs.223,224 The European
MILESTONE study, recruiting from 39 services across
eight countries, assembled a cohort of 763 young people
in transition from child and adolescent mental health
742

services to adult mental health services.225 The
MILESTONE study confirmed that only 19·6% of
participants transitioned to adult services after reaching
the upper age limit of child and adolescent mental health
services (either at age 18 years or 16–19 years), and
26·8% remained in child and adolescent mental health
services for a period after age 18 years.225 The mental
health of people who left care completely did not
deteriorate and they did not have a higher rate of use of
other health services compared with people who were
retained in care, but functional outcomes were less clear,
as was future need for care.225 The representativeness of
this sample is unclear, and possible selection bias limits
the generalisability of the findings. Furthermore, the
appropriateness and effectiveness of the care provided in
the adult system of care for those who did transition was
not examined. The approach within the MILESTONE
study follows the status quo and studies how well it
operates with an implied stance of incrementalism. In
contrast, various alternative models of service provision
have been developing over the past two decades to
address the issue of optimal transition and the much
more salient issue of need beyond the minority who are
able to access child and adolescent mental health services
or adult mental health services during the period of
12–25 years of age.226
A paediatric and adult model ignores the epidemiology
of mental illness, with the peak incidence and prevalence
occurring during the late adolescent and early adult
phase of life.7,45 This model also does not account for the
myriad of important neurobiological and psychosocial
developmental processes that extend across and
throughout this period, including well beyond age
18 years.21 The result of the limitations of this model is
that the very group of patients with the greatest need for
care and the best prospects of responding to early
intervention and treatment (ie, emerging adults) have
the worst access to care across the whole lifespan.223,227
Until recently in HICs, the system has been weakest
where it needs to be strongest.227 In low-resource and
middle-resource settings, any mental health-care system
for children and young people is typically absent.

Status quo for young people
Notwithstanding the debate around the boundaries of
the need for care, robust evidence shows that even in
high-resource settings, a substantial proportion of young
people with mental ill health do not seek treatment.228,229
When young people seek treatment, they face long
waiting times due to high demand and few resources.230
Waiting for care is associated with substantial adverse
consequences, with a 2022 UK survey finding that 58% of
young people had a deterioration of their mental health
and as many as 24% tried to take their own life while they
were waiting for care.231 As in most health care, treatment
is less likely to be effective if the illness becomes
entrenched.232 For those who do access services, quality of

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

care is patchy at best, and attrition rates are high, with a
large study reporting a 42% drop out of treatment by
one’s third therapy session.233 Young people who do
successfully complete treatment rarely receive ongoing
relapse support, yet up to 80% of young people with
complex mental health conditions have repeated
relapses.234,235 Reviews have shown that the mental health
system worldwide is difficult to navigate and young
people face major barriers to transitioning between
services, leading to poor continuity of care and
disengagement from treatment.236 Finally, even when
young people receive established mental health
interventions, their effectiveness is poor, with between a
third and two-thirds of those receiving interventions not
having symptom reductions.237 Key limitations on
effectiveness include slow progress in discovery of new
treatments, poor fidelity to existing evidence-based care,
and insufficient treatment continuity, intensity, and
personalisation. Yet these are all flaws that can be
effectively addressed.
In low-resource and middle-resource settings,
numerous barriers exist for the supply and demand of
mental health care.238 In terms of resources, these
settings tend to have constraints such as inadequate
funding or spending (or both) on mental health, a
paucity of mental health care workers, and poorly
integrated health systems that contribute to inaccessible
mental health care, especially for adolescents. Zhou and
colleagues,49 in a review of child and adolescent mental
health policies in LMICs, identified various challenges
related to policy development and implementation in
these countries, including poor public awareness, little
political willingness, stigma against mental health,
cultural biases against children and adolescents, a
paucity of child and adolescent mental health data, a
shortage of resources and international support,
resulting in decreased local responsibility and
unsustainable programmes. As a result of these
challenges, fewer people seek professional help in
LMICs than in HICs, and when they do, they face long
delays with few and variable pathways to accessing
care. LMICs are culturally, socioeconomically, and
linguistically diverse regions, making it very challenging
to identify strategies that are culturally sensitive and
contextually relevant. Nevertheless, such efforts are
underway and benefit from the work of the wider global
mental health movement, but different strategies that
can be augmented over time will be needed.

A global challenge
To address the needs of young people in terms of mental
health care, a consciously global perspective must be
taken, as nearly 90% of the people in the world aged
between 10 years and 24 years live in what are classified as
LMICs.239 The UN and the World Bank have for many
years divided the world into high-income, middle-income,
or low-income countries. It is our view that with economic

growth and increasing wealth, poorly distributed within
countries due to rising inequality, this model of
categorisation is being increasingly regarded as obsolete,
especially for mental health. Alternative concepts,
touched on earlier, include the categorisation of countries
as WEIRD or non-WEIRD, and the concept of the Global
South. Countries of the Global South have been described
as being in the process of industrialising, are largely
considered to have lower-quality democracies than
countries in the Global North, and frequently have a
history of colonisation by northern, often European
states. Increasing wealth across the world in 6 decades, at
least before the COVID-19 pandemic, has resulted in a
shift such that only 9% of countries fall into the original
low-income category as defined by the late Hans
Rosling.240 The concept for service planning that we prefer
is low-resource, middle-resource, and high-resource
settings.241 The high-income, middle-income, and lowincome countries, and even the WEIRD and non-WEIRD
countries, would then differ only by the relative proportion
of these resource settings which lie within their borders.
When it comes to the global population, the Pew Research
Centre estimated that, in 2020, most people were either
low-income (51%) or poor (10%), 17% were middleincome, 15% were upper-middle-income, and 7% were
high-income.242 These proportions will differ by country
and are subject to change over time. In summary,
although there is great inequality and variation in
amounts of health resources, much of this is now within
countries, not only across countries, and it is harder to
categorise countries as high-income, middle-income,
or low-income. Each country, particularly with rising
inequality, has within its borders low-resource, middleresource, and high-resource settings.

Reform and maturation
Several factors have combined to create change and
provide an avenue for genuine progress in youth mental
health over the past 30 years. First, the consistent
evidence that early intervention for psychosis provided
an optimistic, evidence-informed model that bridged
child and adult mental health services and produced
better outcomes built confidence.232,243,244 A series of
landmark studies showed that reductions in treatment
delay improved long-term outcomes,245 that early
intervention in psychosis services achieved improved
symptomatic and functional outcomes and lower suicide
rates during the first 2–5 years after diagnosis, and that
transition to psychosis from the clinical high-risk or
ultra-high-risk stage of illness to first-episode psychosis
could be delayed and ameliorated.246–248 Evidence from a
2023 study highlighted that this stage-linked model is by
itself insufficient and must be complemented by ongoing
high-quality care in order to sustain and build on these
gains.249 Second, the epidemiology and changing
landscape of the develop­mental transition to adulthood
has become much more obvious.21,113 Finally, the

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

743

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

For more on the International
Association for Youth Mental
Health see www.iaymh.org

accumulating evidence of a deterioration in the mental
health and wellbeing of young people, with rising
incidence and prevalence rates, has become impossible
to ignore.
Slowly, a broad-spectrum youth mental health
approach has emerged and is gaining momentum in
many high-resource settings in an increasing number
of WEIRD countries.209,250 This approach has generally
comprised enhanced versions of primary care that offer
Panel 2: Key elements of youth mental health care
• Increase community awareness, education, and advocacy,
especially for prevention and the social and economic
determinants of mental ill health
• Ensure youth engagement and participation (including
peer workers) in all service elements to ensure that
services are youth-friendly and stigma-free
• Implement a soft entry to care that is rapid, easy, and
affordable (eg, self-referral and drop-in services that are
free or low-cost, in accessible locations with nonstigmatising branding and non-clinical ambience), and
use mobile outreach and detection strategies combined
with community education programmes to reach a range
of groups, including engaging diagnostic subgroups,
notably within psychosis and eating disorders
• Use a holistic and optimistic approach to prevention and
early intervention that offers evidence-informed care
proportionate to the stage of illness and guided by shared
decision making
• Create an integrated practice unit or one-stop shop that is
organised around the needs of young people and provides
the full cycle of care via a multidisciplinary team of clinical
and non-clinical staff, ideally in a single location
• Integrate mental and physical health services, substance
use services, and educational and vocational support
• Build strong connections with schools and tertiary
educational organisations
• Integrate digital support across all stages of care (entry,
blended models of care, and post-discharge) as well as
before entry to face-to-face care
• Prioritise youth-specific care that is inclusive and culturally
and developmentally appropriate, reflecting the
epidemiology of mental illness and the specific needs
associated with the life stage of emerging adulthood—
this involves careful attention to issues of privacy and
confidentiality and ensuring that the support systems
around young people, notably family, educational and
employment structures, are engaged and supported
• Draw on family engagement and support, including
family peer workers
• Create seamless transitions into and out of services (eg,
when transitioning from services for younger children or
into services for older adults)
• Enable continuous learning and improvement through
auditing, evaluation, and workforce development

744

stigma-free or soft entry to care, often with a lay young
person or clinician as a first contact point, with mental
health and other needs-based expertise embedded. This
model has been supported by the International
Association for Youth Mental Health, a network of
academics, health professionals, educators, young
people, families, and other leadership and consti­
tuencies. Integrated youth primary mental health care
lies at the heart of this reform front, with a focus on the
age group of 12–25 years, challenging the disruptive
transition point at age 18 years.209,227,251 Primary care has
been central to WHO strategy for global mental health
care,252 although primary care might mean different
things in different cultures. In youth mental health,
enhanced primary care offers great advantages as an
affordable, low-stigma foundation on which to build
many other features, adapting to local resources,
financial models, and cultural dimensions.209 A primary
care model using lay community human resources,
clinicians, and digital support where possible is more
achievable in settings where investment in mental
health care is modest at best. However, primary care is
only the first step, as many young people require
intensive and expert care to recover from persistent,
complex, or severe forms of illness.253 In high-resource
settings within some WEIRD countries, it is becoming
possible to design and implement comprehensive
models of care for people aged 12–25 years that extend
from the community through primary care to secondary
and tertiary levels of sophisticated quality care,
integrating both face-to-face and digital support.227,236,254,255
However, such specialised and sustained expert
community mental health care to support the entrylevel primary care models has not yet materialised.
In order to span the adolescent and emerging
adult years, a new system of care is required that is
developmentally and culturally appropriate and that
recognises youth-specific biopsychosocial issues and
the patterns of mental health symptom emergence and
comorbidity.227,251 The World Economic Forum has
recognised the need to prioritise and build momentum
in developing a youth-specific system of care and,
together with Orygen, which is based in Australia, has
produced a blueprint for addressing this global
challenge based on review of the evidence and extensive
consultation with young people and other key stake­
holders across the world.29 The resultant framework
specifies key elements of youth mental health care
(panel 2), highlighting that services must be codesigned
and highly accessible in the community, with barriers
to care minimised (including a de-emphasis on formal
diagnosis) and with all young people and their families
feeling welcomed in an inclusive, positive, and nonstigmatising environment.208 Consistent with clinical
staging, holistic, safe, stage-specific, and evidencebased care should be provided at the earliest
opportunity.202

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

Layers and stages of care
The collaborative global effort to create a framework for
youth mental health has identified key areas that have
universal relevance across all resource settings. These
areas include mental health promotion and community
awareness; prevention programmes; integrated primary
youth mental health care; secondary and tertiary care;
school and university settings; integrated digital mental
health platforms; and multidisciplinary workforce,
volunteers, and peer workers. The implementation of
components within these areas will vary according to the
level of resources available (table 1). A fully developed
model, which will require more resources and vertical
integration of services and settings from the community
through primary care to secondary and tertiary levels of
care, is essential to eliminate fragmentation for all young
people accessing mental health care, and their families,
and to effectively meet the needs of those young people
experiencing severe, complex, and persistent mental
illness in a proactive, pre-emptive and proportional way
(figure 5).

Mental health promotion and community awareness
Population health initiatives that educate the public to
recognise and appropriately respond to the early signs of
mental ill health in young people are an essential first
step in alleviating the burden of mental ill health and
improving help-seeking behaviours.209,251 Strategies can
include mental health promotion interventions,256 selfhelp strategies,257 community awareness campaigns,258
and anti-stigma programmes.53 In many parts of the
world, stigma and insufficient knowledge of the concepts
and causes of mental ill health are widespread, and
respecting and working with religious and other
traditional perspectives is needed to make progress.
Adolescent and youth versions of mental health first aid
have been developed and evaluated in the USA and
Australia, with reviews indicating benefits for participants
who received mental health first aid training.259
Improvements in the mental health of the young people
receiving aid, however, have not been found.260 As referred
to previously, raising awareness, particularly with universal
strategies within schools, has been hypothesised to
increase anxiety and lead to a contagion effect that might
be inflating rates of distress and mental ill health.94 Despite
universal strategies having a place in suicide prevention,261
this hypothesis requires testing, as evidence indicates that
it is unable to account for the extent of the rise in prevalence
of mental ill health,68,262–265 and the optimal approach might
be to combine evidence-based universal strategies with
other effective strategies (especially targeted interventions).
Universal approaches, however, have been shown to have a
diluting effect on the capacity to respond to the substantial
subset of young people with more severe and persistent
mental health conditions.266
The engagement of young people with lived experience
of mental ill health is crucial and powerful for promoting

Highresource
settings

Mediumresource
settings

Lowresource
settings

Yes

Yes

Yes

Community
Programmes to address the social, economic, and commercial
determinants of health, including mental health: environment and
climate, housing security, intergenerational inequality, and other
aspects of socioeconomic inequality
Community education and development

Yes

Yes

Yes

Digital mental health platforms

Yes

Yes

Yes

Early detection and, in certain scenarios, screening programmes

Yes

··

··

Prevention programmes (eg, anti-suicide, antibullying, antimaltreatment, and harm reduction for substance use)

Yes

··

··

Mental health promotion programmes (eg, wellbeing, stress
management, social connection, physical health, and nutrition)

Yes

··

··

School, university, and workplace awareness; mental health
promotion; and prevention and early detection programmes

Yes

··

··

Prevention and school-based programmes, including those
delivered via social media

··

Yes

Yes

Yes

··

··

Primary care
Horizontally integrated youth (aged 12–25 years) health and social
care platforms as one-stop shops
Integrated youth health and social care platforms as one-stop shops

··

Yes

··

Peer support and lay volunteers (eg, friendship bridge)

Yes

Yes

··

School and university mental health services

Yes

Yes

··

Digital interventions and telehealth integrated with primary care

Yes

Yes

··

Volunteer, peer, or lay worker programmes (eg, friendship bench or
bridge concept)

··

··

Yes

Digital interventions, telehealth platforms, and social media

··

··

Yes

Multidisciplinary youth mental health systems providing face-toface and online care, closely linked to primary care and community
platforms

Yes

··

··

Complementary, synergistic, and integrated digital platforms,
including those targeting comorbidities that are not the primary
focus of care

Yes

··

··

Multidisciplinary community mental health teams (face-to-face or
online)

··

Yes

··

Secondary care

Complementary, synergistic, and integrated digital platforms

··

Yes

··

Primary care health professionals, including general practitioners and
volunteers, who are trained in youth-friendly practice and mental
health skills and provide care within mainstream community primary
care settings with face-to-face, telehealth, and digital options

··

··

Yes

A suite of specialised, codesigned youth inpatient and residential
services linked to acuity and stage of illness

Yes

··

··

Home-based acute care and assertive community treatment,
including aftercare following self-harm or a suicide attempt

Yes

··

··

Diagnostic stream expertise (eg, psychotic, mood, personality,
substance use, and eating disorders)

Yes

··

··

Tertiary care

Integrated, blended, digital and face-to-face support when feasible

Yes

Yes

··

Inpatient services that are distinct from adult facilities, and homebased acute care if distinct inpatient services are not feasible

··

Yes

··

Home-based acute care with telehealth backup systems

··

··

Yes

Potential interventions according to the authors are shown. Adapted from McGorry et al209 with permission.

Table 1: Implementation of integrated youth mental health care according to level of resource241

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

745

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

Educational
and vocational
support

Phone

Physical health
and substance
use services

Psychosocial
services
Website
Walk in

Diagnostic
streaming

Enhanced
primary care

Peer
and family
support

Community
multidisciplinary
team

Brief
and early
intervention
Contact
Family peer
worker

Friendship bridge,
peer support, and
volunteers

Intake

Hospital in
the home
Engagement

Tertiary
care
Inpatient
services

Exit

Secondary
care

Intergrated
service hub

Assertive
community
outreach
Subacute
residential
services

Assessment and assignment
to right stage of care

Soft entry
Digital platforms
Warm referral
Evaluation

Figure 5: Integrated youth mental health care model
Service entry should be welcoming and stigma-free, with eliminated or reduced barriers to care (soft entry). For some young people, having a conversation with a peer worker or volunteer (friendship
bridge) might sufficiently meet their current needs. Others are assigned to the right level of care (primary, secondary, or tertiary) based on their presenting needs, following assessment by the intake
team. As their needs change, young people can move between these levels of care with supported transitions and seamless referrals.

For more on Baatcheet see
www.sangath.in/baatcheet

For more on It’s Ok To Talk see
www.itsoktotalk.in

for more on Mann Mela see
www.mannmela.in

746

community awareness and reducing stigma.53 The Batyr
programme in Australia, for example, was created by
young people for young people to reduce stigma and
promote help seeking within school and university
settings.267 This engagement requires capacity building
and training to ensure that young people with lived
experience of mental ill health are well supported and feel
safe in leadership and advocacy roles.268 Orygen has
recognised this need and, in 2022, launched the Orygen
Global Youth Mental Health Advocacy Fellowship and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations–Australian Youth
Mental Health Fellowship, which provide individuals aged
18–30 years with advocacy education and training,
including expert mentoring, peer mentoring, and contact
with leaders in global mental health. Interventions have
been launched in low-resource settings as well. The It’s Ok
To Talk initiative by Sangath in India advocates sharing
personal mental health narratives of young people to
address stigma and promote wellbeing through a digital
storytelling website. The programme has included young
people in various capacities as youth advisors, as
storytellers through a virtual mental health museum,
Mann Mela, and as evaluators analysing key messages

derived from narratives received by the platform.269 Recent
develop­ments to the programme include the involvement
of youth in the codesign, development, delivery, and
evaluation of a peer-delivered storytelling intervention
called Baatcheet that targets depression, anxiety, and social
disability among people aged 16–24 years.

Prevention
An urgent and global response is clearly needed to
reduce the burden and rising incidence of youth mental
ill health.4,270 A crucial distinction needs to be made
between universal interventions targeting the harmful
megatrends identified earlier and those targeting more
traditional social determinants of and risk factors for
mental ill health. Although some advances have been
made in defining risk factors and social and economic
determinants of mental disorders (eg, ethnicity, poverty
and social adversity, housing insecurity, trauma, war,
forced migration, neighbourhood deprivation, social
support, education, physical health, and parental mental
illness),52,271 much more needs to be understood.
Candidate risk factors that might have contributed to
rising rates of mental ill health involve recent social,

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

technological, and economic megatrends. Many
potential universal strategies are beyond the scope of the
health portfolio. Childhood, adolescence, and early
adulthood are all sensitive periods when risk factors (eg,
childhood maltreatment, peer victimisation and bullying,
and substance misuse) can increase vulnerability to
mental illness with long-term consequences.271 Thus,
prevention targeted towards risk factors within these
developmental stages might be more effective in the
short term and long term than universal strategies.
Missing elements to the implementation of large-scale
and long-term prevention strategies are political will272
and adequate and effective financing and economic
evaluation frameworks.273 Preventive strategies must span
universal, selective, and indicated prevention, and they
must extend across all stages of illness, as is the case for
other non-communicable diseases.274 Although indicated
prevention is currently the most promising avenue
for preventive efforts,198,275 universal and selective
interventions also have value.276,277 For adolescents and
young adults, strategies that are focused on promoting
resilience and exercise and preventing maltreatment and
bullying, substance use, self-harm, and suicide might be
useful and contribute to improved mental health.210,271,276
Universal and selective interventions are effective in
young people for alcohol use, psychological distress,
anxiety features, affective symptoms, and other emotional
and behavioural problems, but not for eating-related
problems.277 Selective programmes that are based on
lifestyle modification and dissonance, however, might
reduce the onset of eating disorders.278 Other specific
preventive interventions that have been found to be
effective include psychoeducation for affective symptoms
and psychotherapy for anxiety features.277 Regarding
indicated prevention of psychosis, pairwise meta-analyses
support the efficacy of cognitive behavioural interventions
in reducing the likelihood of transition to psychosis in
individuals at ultra-high risk for psychosis.279,280 Although
network meta-analyses suggest a paucity of evidence for
the superiority of any one type of intervention,279,281 the
included trials indicate that transition rates are reduced at
a group level.282 Interventions that result in improvement
do not appear to be syndrome-specific, and so far fall
short of achieving full symptomatic and functional
recovery, as shown in a large adaptive trial involving
support and problem solving, cognitive behavioural case
management, and fluoxetine.283 Although group-level
improvements in functional and symptomatic measures
were found, remission rates were low and relapse rates
were high, indicating the need for treatment innovation
for patients at ultra-high risk for psychosis, and the
identification of treatment-relevant subtypes.283

Integrated primary youth mental health care
As WHO has highlighted for many years, primary care is
key to global mental health,252 and this is where youth
mental health reform has made the most progress to

date.209 Integrated primary mental health care has been
proposed as a solution to reduce service fragmentation
and maximise outcomes due to its focus on patientcentred care delivered by a coordinated multidisciplinary
team of clinical and non-clinical staff, preferably in a
single location.207 Young people and service providers
have endorsed an integrated service model for youth
mental health.284,285

Panel 3: headspace
headspace, Australia’s National Youth Mental Health
Foundation, was created in 2006 for people aged 12–25 years,
in response to young people’s poor access to and quality of
mental health care. The foundations of headspace lie in the
successful early psychosis paradigm that emerged in the early
1990s. headspace is funded by the Australian government
and has been progressively scaled up to 164 centres across
Australia. Each headspace centre is operated by a lead agency
that works in collaboration with an independent consortium
of local organisations to provide governance.
headspace operates as an enhanced primary care model, or
one-stop shop, with a stigma-free soft entry to care. Through a
multidisciplinary team of clinical and non-clinical staff,
headspace provides a range of youth-friendly services across
four core streams of care: mental health, drug and alcohol use,
physical and sexual health, and vocational services. Although
headspace is designed for young people with mild-to-moderate
mental health problems, because it is a primary care model, all
help-seeking young people are welcomed and can access at
least some services and support (referred to as the no-wrongdoor approach), including those with more severe and
persistent illness, even if they do not identify as experiencing
mental ill health. headspace offers a nationwide online and
phone service, eheadspace, that provides services via web chat,
email, and telephone. headspace also delivers a school support
programme that provides suicide postvention support, and a
range of community awareness campaigns focused on
reducing stigma and promoting help seeking, early
identification, and referral pathways. In several Australian
states, the standard headspace digital platform is enhanced
with more comprehensive and fully integrated digital support,
provided alongside face-to-face support across different stages
of treatment via the government-funded, evidence-based
Moderated Online Social Therapy platform.254,255,287
At headspace, stepped care is provided to young people
within a clinical staging framework. Benign interventions (eg,
psychoeducation and support) are offered in the earlier
stages of illness, and medications are offered when first-line
psychosocial interventions are ineffective alone or when
symptoms are more severe. headspace has undergone three
independent evaluations, with findings indicating that the
model has had a positive impact on access to care and
outcomes, especially for those with mild-to-moderate
mental health needs.288

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

747

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

Within the past two decades, a range of integrated
youth mental health care services have emerged
internationally, although reform has largely occurred in
high-resource settings.209,250,286 The Australian headspace
model (panel 3), created in 2006, has been a prototype for
global reform. headspace is a national network of youthfriendly, one-stop shops that provide young people with a
range of health and social services, including mental
health services, drug and alcohol education, physical and
sexual health services, educational and vocational
support, and integrated digital support.208,255 Other
jurisdictions—notably, Ireland,289 Canada,290–292 the
UK,293,294 Denmark, Singapore,295 the USA, the
Netherlands,296 Japan,297 South Korea,298 Israel,299 Hong
Kong,300 Iceland, France,301 and New Zealand302—have
implemented variations of similar models, which have
been adapted to meet local need as well as cultural,
workforce, and financial factors (panel 4). Common
across these services are the goals to reduce barriers to
care by delivering mental health services that are youthfriendly with youth and family involvement, to be easily
Panel 4: Integrated youth services in Canada
Throughout the past decade, integrated youth service models
for mental health and substance use have been increasingly
adopted across Canada, with most provinces and territories
having developed or committed to an integrated youth
services network. The most established networks are ACCESS
Open Minds (pan-Canadian), Aire ouverte in Quebec, Foundry
(British Columbia), and Youth Wellness Hubs Ontario
(Ontario). Other networks include Huddle (Manitoba),
Newfoundland and Labrador Integrated Youth Services,
Integrated Youth Services Nova Scotia, Saskatchewan
Integrated Youth Services, Integrated Youth Services
New Brunswick and Kickstand (Alberta). Approximately
77 youth hubs are in operation and an additional 44 are in
development. In 2022, the Integrated Youth Services
Network of Networks initiative was launched to link existing
and emerging provincial and territorial networks and to
develop a pan-Canadian network of learning health systems
to improve service delivery.
To guide the development of integrated youth services
networks across Canada, ten principles have been developed:
engagement with young people and family; collaborative
partnerships; accessible services; youth-centred care;
responsiveness to the needs of young people; cultural safety;
social justice; holistic care; early intervention and health
promotion; and continuous learning and improvement.303
Consensus guidelines have been developed to operationalise
these principles. Services delivered through Canada’s integrated
youth services model include primary care, mental health care,
substance use services, peer and family support, Indigenous
programming, work and employment support, housing, and
other social services. This approach has been codesigned and
delivered in partnership with young people and families.

748

accessible in the community (eg, the mindset that there
is no wrong door), and low-stigma, and to provide
seamless and holistic care during the transition from
adolescence to early adulthood.209,286,304 Codesign (by which
the model of care benefits from the ideas and views of
young people with lived experience of mental ill health)
and youth partnership (in which young people have an
ongoing role in the operation of the service) are
underlying principles and are essential elements for
building a trusted brand (table 2).208,209,286
Evaluation is an essential component to ensure that
services are achieving their intended aims.29 Independent
and in-house evaluations have found that integrated
youth mental health-care services are associated with
high satisfaction rates among young people, 288,296,306,310,313
are cost-effective,288 and offer a range of benefits:
increased help-seeking behaviours and enhanced access
to care; inclusion of marginalised and at-risk populations
such as Indigenous people and LGBTIQA+ people292,306,313
(although effectively meeting the needs of these
populations requires strengthening);288 reductions in
distress, symptoms, 288,306,311,313 suicidal ideation, and selfharm;306 and improvements in social, educational, and
occupational functioning. 288,306,313 A 2017 review of
integrated youth mental health services confirmed that
young people are highly satisfied with these services
and have benefitted from improvements in service
accessibility as well as symptomatic and functional
recovery.250 Evaluations should also seek to identify any
iatrogenic effects of models of care and interventions,
such as stigma and barriers to engagement and
continuity of care.
As with any paradigm shift, these reforms have attracted
critics as well as early adopters.319,320 Critiques can be seen
as a sign that real change is underway and, by pointing
out weaknesses and gaps, can suggest ways of improving
new models of care. The main criticisms of integrated
youth mental health care have been that focusing on
early-stage illness can detract from or divert focus from
the care of later stages of illness, that the models have
insufficient clinical expertise, and that the evidence for
the benefits provided is insufficient. Reformers have
typically engaged with and responded to such
critiques,321–323 emphasising that integrated youth mental
health care is a primary care that is designed for early
stages of illness and the degree of severity that can be
managed in primary care. These responses are by no
means the complete answer, but they are often judged as
if they were. Rather than draw funds away from seriously
ill patients, integrated youth mental health primary care
centres have been created with new funding, acting as a
portal for those patients who are seriously ill to better
access the next tier of care where this exists, publicly
exposing the need for this access, and increasing the
pressure on governments to ensure that the needs of this
large cohort of patients with persistent and potentially
disabling illnesses will be addressed. The evidence for the

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

Target
Number of young
age, years people accessing
service

Key outcomes

14

10–25

11 430 occasions of
service (mean, per
centre per year)

94% of young people and 89% of stakeholders report
that the service is effective in improving health and
wellbeing

Integrated youth health care
service

104

11–25

700–1000
(per centre per year)

Young people report that the service contributes to
their wellbeing, and professionals report that the
service responds to individual situations and helps to
prevent deterioration

Australia

Enhanced primary health-care
service offering integrated care
across four core streams of
support: mental health, drug and
alcohol use, physical and sexual
health, and vocational

164 (plus
9 upcoming)

12–25

106 574 (2020–21)

Increased access to services; cost-effective; 74% of
young people have high or very high severity of
psychological distress at entry; post-treatment,
young people had decreased psychological distress
(47%), improved wellbeing (82%), significant
symptomatic or functional improvement (60%),
statistically significant reductions in suicidal ideation
and self-harm, a statistically significant increase in
the number of days working or studying, and a
reduced impact of mental health issues on work and
study (83%); 88% of young people who used the
service were satisfied

2008

Ireland

Youth mental health service
focused on prevention and early
intervention

14 (plus
1 upcoming)

12–25

>44 000
(since 2008)

52% of young people have moderate-to-severe or
severe distress at entry; psychological distress posttreatment: 62% aged 17–25 years showed reliable
and clinically significant improvement and 68% aged
12–16 years showed reliable improvement; >90% of
all users were satisfied with the support received

CHAT295,312

2009

Singapore

National youth mental health
check and outreach programme

headspace*

2013

Denmark

Counselling and support service

ACCESS Open
Minds291,313

2014

Canada

Integrated youth service offering
mental health care and access to
physical health and sexual health
services, traditional Indigenous
programmes and support, and
other social services

14

11–25

8043 referrals and 64% of young people have moderate to severe
mental health problems at entry; as hypothesised,
5280 youth
evaluated (2016–20) significant increases occurred over time in referred or
help-seeking youth and reductions in delays to
evaluation and services received; post-treatment:
significant reductions occurred in distress and the
severity of mental health problems, and
improvements occurred in mental health and school,
work, and social functioning; the service had high
satisfaction rates: 88% of young people were
satisfied with service received and 86% satisfied with
services overall; $9·70 savings for every $1 invested

headspace299,314

2014

Israel

Integrated youth mental health
service with three major
components: prevention and early
intervention, community
awareness, and training and
education for professionals

2

12–25

652
(Bat Yam centre)

Foundry292

2015

British
Columbia,
Canada

Integrated health and social
service centres offering access to
physical health, mental health,
substance use, peer support, and
social support care

Year
established

Location

Service description

Youth One Stop
Shops302

1994

New Zealand

Holistic health and social care

Maisons des
Adolescents301,305

1999

France

headspace288,306– 308 2006

Jigsaw309–311

Number of
centres

1

28 (plus
4 upcoming)

16–30

12–25

17 (plus
12–24
18 upcoming)

3343 (2009–19)

NA

4783 (2015–18)

>90% of young people report that the CHAT
assessment service is accessible, acceptable, and
appropriate; of those receiving CHAT supportive
interventions, 47% showed a >25% change in distress
reduction and 20% showed a 6–25% change in
distress reduction; >90% of young people were
satisfied with CHAT supportive interventions
Since 2020, the number of young people who require
support and report suicidal thoughts has increased;
young people’s satisfaction with both life and their
wellbeing increased during service engagement

66% present with high or very high severity of
distress; the service has increased the accessibility
and familiarity of mental health services available to
young people and has high satisfaction

81% of young people have high or very high severity
of distress at entry; young people strongly agree that
having multiple services in one location makes it
easier to get help; excellent access for Indigenous and
LGBTIQA+ groups; 70% of users report that services
meet their needs; 75% of users are satisfied overall
(unpublished)
(Table 2 continues on next page)

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

749

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

Year
established

Location

Service description

Number of
centres

Target
Number of young
age, years people accessing
service

Key outcomes

15–30

206 (2019)

Diagnoses: schizophrenia spectrum disorder (53·4%),
depression (24·8%), ultra-high risk for psychosis
(9·7%), and bipolar disorder (9·2%)

(Continued from previous page)
Mindlink298

2016

South Korea

Accessible, youth-friendly, stigmafree, community-based early
intervention centres providing
intensive case management and
group programmes

Youth Wellness
Hubs Ontario290

2017

Ontario,
Canada

Integrated service hubs offering
services related to mental health,
substance use, primary care,
education, employment, training,
housing and other community
and social services. Hubs also
include peer services, outreach,
and system navigation services

25 (plus
5 upcoming)

12–25

9585 (2020–23)

91% of young people have moderate-to-severe
psychological distress at entry; 46% of young people
report suicidal ideation in the past 2 weeks; posttreatment, statistically significant reductions in
distress and severity of mental health problems, and
improvements in mental health occurred; >90% of
young people report positive service experience
across multiple service domains

@ease226,296

2018

Netherlands

Youth-friendly, easily accessible
support for mental health and
wellbeing

12 (plus 4
upcoming)

12–25

>750 face-to-face
sessions and
>3000 online chats

High diversity and complexity of need at entry;
statistically significant improvement in symptoms and
functioning post-treatment; 33·3% of users improved
clinically and 39·6% reliably improved (SOFAS); 43·2%
improved to a better clinical category and 28·4%
improved reliably (CORE-10); on average, young
people were satisfied or very satisfied with wait times
and their conversations

Aire Ouverte315

2019

Quebec,
Canada

28 (plus
Integrated youth services
14 satellite
providing a variety of health and
sites)
social services, including mental
health, sexual health, vocational
support, and other related services

12–25

19 056
(2024 [24 sites])

The majority of young people present for mental
health and psychosocial needs; high numbers of
vulnerable youth at entry (eg, looked-after youth and
LGBTQIA+); young people report being satisfied and
appreciating the flexibility of the model and access
pathways

headspace*

2019

Iceland

Counselling and support service

2 (plus
22 satellite
services)

12–25

390

Characteristics of service users: average age 19 years,
69% female, 26% live independently, 56% live in
Reykjavík, 66% became aware of the service via
friends or family; young people have benefitted from
a counselling model: few service users have required
more intensive treatment (~10%) and the service has
helped young people remain in work or education;
four sessions attended on average; collaboration has
increased with headspace Denmark and headspace
Norway, termed Nordic headspace; a conference has
been planned for 2024

Piki316

2019

New Zealand

Integrated youth mental health
care service

NA

18–25

5307 (2019–20)

Diversity of need exists at entry; however, likelihood
of severe distress presentations is greater; 75% would
recommend Piki to others

SODA297

2019

Japan

Integrated youth mental health
service providing clinical case
management

1

12–35

105 (March to
September 2020)

80% of users required short-term support;
20% received clinical case management for
6 months, with improvements in Global Assessment
of Functioning scores at the end of treatment

Levelmind, with
Headwind
(online
service)300,317

2019

Hong Kong

Integrated youth mental health
platform offering multidisciplinary
care in community youth centres,
with service stratified in 3 tiers
based on distress and clinical
assessment

8

12–25

>18 000

Initial outcomes suggest a reduction of distress in
young people with moderate distress and prevention
of deterioration in distress in young people with low
distress

Allcove318

2021

USA

Early mental health services,
primary medical care, substance
use services, peer and family
support, and supported education
and employment services

16

2 (plus
9 upcoming)

12–25

5000 (2021–23)

NA

Services were identified via author knowledge and the International Association for Youth Mental Health. ACCESS=adolescent/young adult connections to community-driven, early, strengths-based and stigmafree services. CHAT=Centre of Excellence for Youth Mental Health. CORE-10=Clinical Outcomes in Routine Evaluation 10. NA=not available. SODA=Support with One-Stop Care on Demand for Adolescents and
Young Adults in Adachi. SOFAS=Social and Occupational Functioning Assessment Scale. *Unpublished data.

Table 2: Characteristics and outcomes of youth mental health services

750

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

effectiveness of the enhanced primary care models has
accumulated over time from inde­
pendent evaluations,
288,306
and areas for improvement have been identified.
Many critiques have been helpful, and although some
seem to have been poorly motivated and misleading,
critiques overall are an inevitable companion to real
progress when the status quo is being challenged.

Secondary and tertiary services
Although primary care services are predominantly
designed for young people with mild-to-moderate needs,
individuals with higher or more complex needs are
increasingly accessing these services.250,286,288 This group
of young people who require more specialised, sustained,
and multidisciplinary care than those with mild-tomoderate needs have been termed the missing middle.324
A substantial proportion of these young people do not
respond to simple primary care models,325 which function
as a stigma-free entry portal to the next tier of care for
this group. Access to this next tier is currently only
feasible in a minority of high-resource settings. In
Victoria, Australia, the Royal Commission into mental
health care236 catalysed a major restructure of public
sector specialist or secondary mental health care, which
will now see the child and youth system boundary with
adult mental health shift to 25 years of age. There will
now be two zones or cultures of care within this system—
one for younger children aged 0–11 years, and one for
young people and emerging adults aged 12–25 years. The
zone or stream of care for those aged 12–25 years is
youth-friendly and codesigned with multimodal and
holistic components of care, from residential services
through to multidisciplinary community care, and it is
vertically integrated with the enhanced primary care
system of headspace centres, which have focused on
individuals in this age group for 17 years. Implementation
will include substantial challenges related to training,
workforce, sufficient financial resources, and appetite for
workplace culture reform. Such reform needs to address
access to services for groups of young people whose
needs have historically been seen as reasons to
discriminate against them and to deny them services,
such as those living with personality disorders or
substance use disorders, and young people involved with
the justice system.
At a tertiary level, options available to young people,
particularly in high-resource settings, should include
inpatient or intensive home-based care, subacute
programmes, and short-term or long-term residential
care that is strengths-based and recovery-focused. These
facilities must be adequately funded, codesigned with
young people and families, and distinct from younger
childhood and adult facilities (ie, they should be
developmentally and culturally acceptable to young
people). In low-resource settings, home-based acute care
should be available if youth-specific inpatient services are
not feasible or affordable. In India, Support, Advocacy

and Mental Health Interventions for Children in
Vulnerable Circumstances and Distress (SAMVAD) is a
national initiative located in a tertiary mental health care
facility.326 SAMVAD aims to address the challenges in
delivering child and adolescent mental health care in
low-resource settings and enhance access to child and
adolescent mental health services. SAMVAD incorporates
the integration of these services into child protection,
judicial and education systems, and delivers culturally
specific training and capacity building, mentoring, and
public awareness initiatives. Between 2020 and 2023, it
provided training to 24 599 mental health professionals
across India.327

School and university settings
Educational settings are a prime platform for the mental
health care of young people due to the large volume of
time young people spend at school, although this is not
applicable to some low-resource settings, and access
to education varies across and within countries.328
Educational settings have a central role in promoting
mental health,329,330 recognising the warning signs of
mental ill health,331 and delivering prevention and
intervention programmes.271,332 Meta-analyses of schoolbased preventive interventions have found weak or modest
evidence for the prevention of anxiety and depression,333,334
with indications that targeted prevention might be more
effective than universal prevention for depression.333
Evidence from both high-resource and low-resource
settings suggests that low-cost interventions that target the
whole school environment are effective in lowering rates
of bullying victimisation, improving wellbeing,335 and
reducing the severity of depressive symptoms, particularly
when delivered by lay counsellors.336 Findings from a large
cluster randomised controlled trial of a universal schoolbased mindfulness programme, however, indicate that
more research is needed to codesign interventions with
young people and to determine what works for whom and
under what circumstances.98 That study found no evidence
for the superior effectiveness of mindfulness compared
with teaching as usual in reducing the risk of mental
health problems and promoting wellbeing, although
engagement was low and acceptability was mixed.98 Where
there was evidence of a difference between treatment
groups, outcomes were marginally worse for the
mindfulness group (ie, across the domains of hyperactivity
and inattention, panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive
disorder, emotional symptoms, and mindfulness skills).
Within non-WEIRD countries, Premium for
Adolescents (PRIDE) is the largest ever adolescent
mental health research programme, implemented from
2016–22 in low-income schools across Goa and
New Delhi, India. The aims were to develop and test a
suite of psychosocial interventions arranged around a
transdiagnostic stepped-care architecture for common
adolescent mental health problems. A fully powered
randomised controlled trial showed that step one (a lay

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

751

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

counsellor-delivered, brief problem-solving intervention)
reduced youth-reported psychosocial problem severity
and that these effects were sustained over a year.337,338
Classroom information sessions, compared with schoolwide publicity materials, greatly enhanced demand for
step one in a stepped-wedge cluster randomised trial.339
An alternative digital format of problem solving proved
to be feasible and acceptable with in-person guidance,
but remote delivery was less viable.340,341 Evidence was also
found for the incremental benefit of a tailored, secondstep intervention for non-responders to step one.342 A
randomised trial of two different e-learning formats
found that periodic coaching can improve learning
outcomes and engagement among novice counsellors.343
Regarding higher education, a 2022 systematic review
on mental health interventions in university and college
settings found evidence for the effectiveness of
mindfulness-based interventions, cognitive behavioural
therapy (CBT), and interventions delivered via technology,
whereas psychoeducation appeared to be less effective.344
CBT-related interventions were also found to deliver
sustained effects over time;344 however, research has
identified that integrated models of university-based
mental health care that can meet a spectrum of student
wellbeing and mental health support needs across
prevention, early intervention, and treatment, rather
than stand-alone interventions, are needed.345,346 These
models include supported transitions to community
services when clinically indicated and the integration of
effective digital mental health interventions.347 A
comprehensive approach is needed beyond wellbeing
strategies and outdated student health models, which
have not addressed the scale and severity of the mental ill
health that exists in tertiary educational settings.

Digital technologies to drive service innovation and reform in
youth mental health
Young people are the highest users of the internet and
digital technology. Being raised entirely within a
connected and digital world, young people (termed
digital natives)348 are the first to adopt new digital
technologies as they arise and engage extensively with
existing technologies and all features of the internet.349
For example, a 2022 report from the Pew Research Centre
found that, in the USA, 95% of adolescents (aged
13–17 years) had access to a smartphone (and 98% of
adolescents aged 15–17 years), 97% used the internet
daily, and 35% used one of the top online social media
platforms “almost constantly”.350 Notably, the percentage
of adolescents who reported being almost constantly
online doubled over the previous 7 years (46% in 2022 vs
24% in 2017).350 Much attention has been focused on the
potential for harm and risks to mental health posed by
this dramatic change. Conversely, the use of smartphones
might offer opportunities to extend and enhance models
of care globally and to bridge the digital divide previously
present in LMICs,351,352 although access varies across
752

countries; for example, only 56% of adolescents aged
10–15 years in Tanzania have access to their own or
someone else’s mobile phone, compared with 95% in
Sudan.353 This mobile phone usage means that digital
and virtual technologies and interventions can not only
deliver accessible support in settings where mental
health professionals are non-existent or in short supply,
but they can also augment the reach, impact of, and even
transition between existing mental health services.
Digital interventions have the scope to address some of
the key shortcomings of youth mental health services
and interventions, particularly making it difficult to seek
treatment, creating poor access to treatment, long
waiting lists, poor continuity of care, and insufficient
personalisation and fidelity to evidence. Integrated digital
interventions and blended models of care have the
potential to address most of these issues and thus
improve overall effectiveness.
The role of digital and mobile technology and
smartphones is therefore crucial in the redesign of
mental health services. These technologies now include a
wide range of highly personalised (passive and active)
mobile sensors and apps that can capture subjective data
on repeated occasions, without the need for physical
attendance at a clinic. Therapeutic platforms of care are
now becoming available and can be integrated within
face-to-face care systems.254,255 These platforms can also
be used to reduce the risk of suicide and self-harm,354,355
depression, and alcohol misuse.356 Improving the
scalability of such approaches is the next challenge.
More than 100 efficacy trials have shown that online
interventions improve accessibility and produce engage­
ment and effectiveness outcomes that are equivalent to
traditional face-to-face services and interventions.357,358
Rates of engagement in these first-generation, standalone
digital interventions appear to be lower in young people
compared with adults.359,360 A plausible contributing factor
to this finding is that young people have consistently
endorsed integrated digital interventions that blend faceto-face services and digital support, as opposed to
standalone digital inter­
ventions.361,362 Similarly, experts
and consumers alike have called for a contemporary
youth mental health system enabled by digital technology,
where digital interventions are blended into service
delivery to improve accessibility and continuity of care
and are shaped by interdisciplinary translational research
that informs service delivery and policy.236,363 Yet, despite
evidence from 15 years of research for the effectiveness
of digital mental health interventions, a historical and
global research translation gap has hindered clinical
implementation, and very few digital interventions have
been successfully integrated into mental services.364 This
failure is twofold. First, nearly every digital mental
health intervention has been designed in academic or
commercial settings, in isolation from clinical services,
thereby not considering service constraints and
needs.364–366 Second, the science of digital mental health

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

implementation is often based on trial and error, with
little systematic research on implementing digital
technologies.367
Promisingly, developments have been made in
integrating digital technologies into youth mental health
services. A key example is the Moderated Online Social
Therapy (MOST) platform, which is a purpose-built digital
intervention designed to provide an integrated solution to
youth mental health service limitations.287 To achieve this
aim, MOST was designed in partnership with young
people, clinicians, mental health services, and industry
partners. This platform merges evidence-based, trans­
diagnostic, interactive psychological treatment with
professional psychological, vocational, and peer support
that is integrated with a social network of peers and peer
workers. MOST was designed to work in tandem with
services and address their limitations across the care
pathway or phases of care (ie, entry and waitlists blended
with face-to-face care and post-discharge). Results from
several pilot studies and a clinical trial showed that MOST
was engaging over prolonged periods of time; safe; nonstigmatising; endorsed and valued by young people,
clinicians, and services; effective in improving vocational
recovery and reducing use of hospital services in youth
psychosis; cost-saving; and cost-effective, with four clinical
trials underway.254,368–372 After being adapted and tested
across Australia, the USA, Canada, and Europe, MOST has
now been implemented in headspace centres and specialist
youth mental health services, including in more than
200 clinics across eastern Australia.373–375 Comprehensive,
multifaceted digital tools such as MOST have great
potential in low-resource and middle-resource settings
where the content must be adapted through codesign and
translation within local cultural and language conditions.
Social media platforms have similar potential to deliver
mental health interventions in low-resource and middleresource settings,376 and have been safely used in highresource settings with appropriate risk management
strategies among young people experiencing active suicidal
ideation.377
Although the aforementioned examples are
promising in terms of the potential of digital technology
to drive the development of new models of care in
youth mental health, the rapid development and
adoption of breakthrough technologies including
artificial intelligence, natural language processing,
virtual and augmented reality, and virtual worlds
provides an unprecedented opportunity to use new
innovations to address historical problems in youth
mental health.237,378,379 To fulfil this opportunity, there is a
need to adopt robust scientific designs, develop new
models of translational research that expedite the
development–evaluation–implementation cycle and
enhance the external validity of our interventions, and
embrace best practice in implementation science,
psychological interventions, behavioural science, and
user-centred design.

Multidisciplinary workforce, peer workers, and volunteers
The successful implementation of youth mental health
reform requires a multidisciplinary and appropriately
skilled workforce that includes clinical and non-clinical
staff (eg, psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers,
youth workers, nurses, general practitioners, alcohol and
other drug workers, vocational workers, and peer
workers). The demand for youth mental health care has
increased,230,380–382 and workforce and skills shortages are a
major challenge globally, particularly in low-resource
settings.383–385 Even in high-resource settings, youth
mental health services have faced difficulties in attracting
and retaining a multidisciplinary workforce, leading to
excessive wait times.230,288
Strategies to meet workforce and skills challenges
include the creation of new subspecialty training in youth
psychiatry386 (or, in Europe, transitional psychiatry),
leveraging digital technologies,387 and increased govern­
ment investment to support training and incentivise
workforce growth and retention in the youth mental health
sector. Neither adult nor child and adolescent training
programmes are currently fit for purpose, as another
dimension of skills and evidence is needed to effectively
respond to emerging adults. Additionally, an abundance of
human resources, including in low-resource and middleresource settings, can be drawn upon to innovatively build
systems of mental health care that are contextappropriate.388,389 The Friendship Bench concept390 is the
best known example of this strategy; however, the use of
volunteers and peer workers in new youth primary care
services has been a creative response to the difficulty in
assembling professional clinical workforces and structures
that occurs even in high-resource settings.296 Peer or lay
workers are a core component of the youth mental health
workforce
across
all
resource
settings,29,286,343
complementing traditional clinical roles rather than
merely filling staff shortages. The incorporation of peer
workers assists in providing care that is holistic, strengthsbased, patient-centred, and recovery-oriented both in faceto-face and digital settings. Peer workers’ roles are diverse
and might include enhancing service engagement,
providing emotional support, assisting in navigating the
mental health system, and prioritising and planning
treatment.391,392 When combined with shared decision
making, peer support can strengthen young people’s
involvement in treatment decisions.393 This strategy also
enhances and catalyses engagement capacity for culturally
diverse communities. Peer work is an emerging and
demanding role. For it to be safe and sustainable, quality
training, supervision, support, and appropriate
remuneration are essential. Scope of practice should be
clearly defined to avoid stress and burnout.
The models of youth mental health care that are
emerging represent a prescient response to what has
now been revealed as a global crisis in youth mental
health, but they are merely a foundation for a much
greater mission. The youth mental health crisis and

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

753

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

rising prevalence have placed these first-generation
models under increasing demand pressures. The
challenge is now to tackle the sources and structural
forces underpinning this crisis and to build several tiers
of evidence-based care to respond such that the full
ecosystem of care is accessible. This endeavour will
involve global collaboration and a mission-based
approach with a series of phases powered by
innovation.394

Part 4: The economic imperative
Introduction

The 2019 Global Burden of Disease study confirmed that
mental disorders accounted for the highest disease
burden (as measured by disability-adjusted life-years) for
the age 10–24 years group across all income groupings:
high-income,
upper-middle-income,
lower-middleincome, and low-income countries.395 Suicide is also a
major contributor to the disease burden globally in this
age group, being the leading cause of years of life lost in
the WHO southeast Asian region, and in the top three
causes of years of life lost in all other WHO regions
except Africa, where it is 10th.69
Poor mental health in young people is also associated
with substantive personal and economic effects. Most of

these costs are incurred outside of health-care systems and
involve the costs of social welfare programmes, lost
taxation receipts, loss of productivity or mental wealth,
costs of violence, crime and incarceration, costs of suicide,
and premature mortality.396 The global cost of all mental
disorders for all age groups was estimated to range from
US$2·5–8·5 trillion in 2010, depending on the method of
assessment used, with the cost projected to double
by 2030.397 A key cost driver is that mental disorders
typically emerge by age 25 years.7,113 Mental health problems
emerging early in life adversely affect crucial developmental
transitions, potentially with profound consequences for
life trajectories. For example, 30–70% of adolescents with
depressive symptoms or major depressive disorders are
likely to experience fully fledged and persistent major
depressive disorder in adulthood.398 As indicated previously,
the risk of mental disorders is also influenced by social
determinants such as socioeconomic status, immigrant
status, and exposure to traumatic life events.52
Young people with depression are more likely to
smoke399 or vape,400 and poor mental health has been
associated with a substantially increased risk of lifetime
adverse physical health outcomes such as coronary heart
disease or stroke401–403 and disparities of decades in life
expectancy, even in affluent countries with strong social

Panel 5: Recommendations for economic strategies to reduce the impact of mental ill health in young people
• Invest in proven, cost-effective programmes for mental
health promotion, prevention, and early intervention at
several life stages
• Invest in cost-effective models of youth mental health care
in high-resource settings, specifically early intervention for
psychosis and integrated, enhanced primary care platforms
such as headspace (Australia), Jigsaw (Ireland), and
Integrated Youth Services (Canada; eg, Youth Wellness Hubs
Ontario and Foundry in British Columbia), with careful
consideration given to fidelity of implementation of these
multidisciplinary models of care; these programmes,
especially when well implemented and supported by longer
term continuity of care via multidisciplinary teams, will
provide good value for money with probable savings across
many government portfolios, as supported by a range of
economic studies
• Explore new cost-effective methods of providing care in
low-resource and middle-resource settings where health
professionals are in short supply; modified primary care
models enhanced through task sharing and task shifting
and by telehealth and digital health care are likely to be the
best value for money
• Invest in programmes that improve the physical health of
young people with mental health problems and prevent the
onset of comorbid non-communicable medical illnesses
such as cancer and cardiovascular disease, which result in
premature mortality and additional health costs in this
high-risk group

754

• Address challenges related to securing substantial
additional public investment in youth mental health and
expanding the scope, range, and quality of economic
research in mental health
• Identify, reverse, and mitigate harmful political,
economic, and social policies that are undermining mental
health and wellbeing and contributing to the increase of
the incidence and prevalence of mental illness in young
people, including:
• Reversing intergenerational inequality and wealth
transfer, which has increased the socioeconomic
precarity of young people in many countries
• Improving housing and rental affordability as a
proportion of annual income, which has worsened
steadily over recent decades in many societies
• Reversing the trend to commodification and
privatisation of education, including the improving
equality of opportunity
• Improving working conditions and the rights of younger
workers and reversing the casualisation of the younger
workforce
• Supporting policies to genuinely respond to the climate
emergency and climate anxiety
• Developing policies to limit the harm caused to the
mental health of young people by unregulated social
media platforms and smartphones

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

safety nets and universal health-care systems.404 Poor
mental health in adolescence increases the risk of poor
educational attainment,24 and non-participation in postsecondary education, unemployment, low income when
working, and being a recipient of welfare payments.405,406
These substantial personal, community, and economic
burdens demand better policy responses. In this section,
we provide an overview of current economic evidence for
action and identify areas in which action can be
strengthened (panel 5). As the generalisability of
economic evidence can be open to questions and depends
on multiple factors, including similarity of resource
contexts, we discuss this evidence according to resource
level. Key terms used throughout this section are defined
in the appendix (pp 15–16).

Evidence of cost-effective interventions and approaches
from high-resource settings
Prevention
Evidence is reasonably good for several cost-effective
interventions for mental disorder prevention and mental
health promotion specifically targeting young people in
high-resource settings. Economic evidence of psychological
interventions targeting high-risk populations for the
prevention of anxiety disorders has consistently shown
that youth-focused CBT, parent-focused CBT, or parentfocused psychoeducational interventions provide good
value for money.407,408 With respect to the prevention of
depression in young people, the evidence is mixed; for
example, recent Australian modelled studies have shown
that school-based psychological interventions were costeffective regardless of whether they were universal or
indicated interventions.409 In contrast, trial-based economic
evaluations found that school-based CBT was more costly
and less effective than usual care for indicated prevention
of major depressive disorder over a 1-year period.410,411
Similarly, a universal school-based mindfulness
programme was neither more effective nor more costeffective than standard teaching based on the coprimary
outcomes (risk for depression, social–emotional–
behavioural functioning, and wellbeing), although
evidence suggested some cost-effectiveness when qualityadjusted life-years were used as the measure of benefit.98
The cost-effectiveness of many public health and healthpromotion interventions depends not only on their
availability and affordability, but also on their initial uptake
and sustained engagement by their intended target
population. For example, in 2017 Le and colleagues found
that a cognitive dissonance intervention for the prevention
of anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa would become
cost-effective if more young people (aged 15–18 years)
agreed to participate.412 Interventions need to be acceptable
to young people and delivered in a way that minimises
their risk of stigmatisation and exclusion. Costeffectiveness can also be affected by how interventions are
implemented (eg, whether secure multiannual funding is
made available to attract and retain required staff) and the

context of the health systems in which interventions are
delivered (eg, whether the availability and capability of
third-party services facilitate adequate, appropriate, and
timely referrals to and from an intervention service). No
unintended or unaccounted for consequences of
implementation (such as increased waiting times) should
occur.
The economic case for investing in mental health
prevention and promotion when different interventions
are completed within the same study context has been
examined in the UK413 and Australia.414 Results
for interventions targeting young people, using
conservative modelling assumptions, have shown that
for every Australian dollar invested in the prevention of
depression or anxiety at school or university, there is an
approximate AU$1·1 to $3·1 return from that
investment in terms of health-care service savings and
increased productivity.414

Service models and treatments
One concept focusing on young people that has been
robustly evaluated from an economic perspective is
early intervention in psychosis. Evidence consistently
shows cost-effectiveness of early interventions in
psychosis across different health systems.415–420 A Hong
Kong-based study associated early intervention with
35% savings in health-care costs for every point of
improvement on general psychopathology measured by
the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale.421 In the UK,
models and individual patient data analyses have
reported cost savings and increased benefits (such
as improvements on clinical outcome scales)
associated with early intervention in psychosis
services.422–425
Easy-access, youth-friendly, and integrated communitybased primary care services that provide evidence-based
interventions for people aged 12–25 years have been
established in several countries.250 These services have
been shown to increase access to mental health services
and improve symptomatic and functional recovery postservice.250 Given that these services are fairly new and are
also complex, multifaceted, intersectoral, communitybased, and organic, economic evidence is still emerging.426
An independent evaluation commissioned by the
Australian Government concluded that headspace’s
primary youth mental health services were effective and
cost-effective, especially for those for whom they were
designed.288 Although the cost-effectiveness of digital
mental health services remains unclear,427 some studies
in Australia have found that an online intervention with
the sole aim of increasing access to care for young people
resulted in improvements to quality of life and was costsaving compared with usual care.428 A collaborative care
model has also been found to be very cost-effective in
reducing depressive symptoms in adolescents when
implemented in an integrated health-care environment.429
Other evidence for specific interventions targeting

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

755

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

disorders that occur mainly in young people (such as
depressive or eating disorders) have also been found to
be highly cost-effective.430–432

Evidence of cost-effective interventions and approaches
from low-resource and middle-resource settings
Most of the literature on this matter has focused on the
classification of countries as low-income and middleincome, as previously discussed. The World Bank has
emphasised the links between economic development,
cognitive capacity, and mental capital (ie, cognitive and
emotional resources)433 in LMICs.434 These issues,
however, pertain not only to particular countries and
parts of the world where such low resourcing is most
prominent, but also to substantial sections of what are
termed high-income and middle-income countries,
where disadvantage and poor access to care are also
widespread. Already, economic modelling studies are
helping to “debunk the overgeneralized claim that
treatment of mental disorders is not a cost-effective use
of scarce health care resources”.435 There is scope to adapt
some actions implemented in high-resource settings for
delivery in low-resource and middle-resource settings
wherever they are located, and a requirement to develop
novel solutions that address the specific challenges of
low-resource settings. The optimal way to determine
cost-effectiveness in LMICs is unclear. The most
common approach is to apply a criterion that the
incremental cost of an intervention should be no more
than 1–3 times the per capita GDP for each disabilityadjusted life-year (DALY) averted, but this approach
remains controversial.436

Prevention
Few economic assessments of the value of promotion
and prevention within a low-resource context exist. Given
the association between poverty and poor mental health,
the use of fiscal measures such as cash transfer
programmes and other poverty reduction measures to
promote and improve the mental health of young people
have come to prominence.437 Although formal cost–
benefit analyses of most of these programmes are still
needed, some evidence suggests they protect mental
health.438 In Malawi, a cluster randomised trial of an
unconditional cash transfer programme targeted to very
poor households statistically significantly reduced
depressive symptoms in young people, especially young
women.89 A trial of a similar programme in Kenya
reported statistically significantly lower rates of
depression in young men compared with young
women.439 In Uganda, a trial of two financial incentives
encouraging young orphans to save more money
reported statistically significant reductions in depression
at 2-year follow up, with the most generous financial
scheme being more cost-effective.440 At 4-year follow up,
these improvements in depression were no longer
statistically significant, although other benefits, such as
756

reduced hopelessness, persisted.440 In Brazil, lower
suicide rates have been observed following receipt of a
cash transfer programme conditional on attendance at
school, although the cost-effectiveness of the intervention
was not examined.441
Legislative measures that reduce harmful behaviours
such as excess alcohol consumption have been modelled
as cost-effective in all WHO regions.442 Measures to
reduce suicide risk, such as legislation to restrict access
to hazardous pesticides, have been associated with a
substantial decrease in suicide rates in some Asian
countries, including in Sri Lanka, at a very cost-effective
US$1·23 per DALY averted.443

Treatment
Economic modelling work for the general population in
all WHO regions indicates that investment in both
pharmacological and psychological therapies can be costeffective even in the most resource-constrained regions
of the world.444,445 Examples of country-level modelling of
mental health care also exist. In Ethiopia, at a willingnessto-pay amount of US$500 (approximately GDP per
capita in Ethiopia) per DALY averted, investment in
antidepressant therapy and psychotherapy would be
considered cost-effective; if the threshold were $1500,
then some psychosocial treatments and lithium for
bipolar disorder would also be cost-effective.446
Some effectiveness evaluations in low-resource settings
target specific vulnerable groups that are not common in
high-resource settings, such as young people living with
communicable disease or who are exposed to conflictrelated trauma. For example, psychological therapy for
young people in Sierra Leone who had experienced warrelated psychological distress has a cost per qualityadjusted life-year gained equivalent to 2·6 times GDP
per capita.447 This ratio would be more favourable if nonhealth-related benefits, such as long-term benefits of
increased education participation, were included.

Task-shifting and task-sharing
The challenges in resource-constrained settings have
also led to innovation in intervention delivery. To address
workforce constraints, it is possible to shift responsibility
for mental health care delivery from mental health
specialists to primary care or lay health workers, or to
share this responsibility, and still provide care that is
effective at reducing the burden of common mental
disorders.389 Task-shifting and task-sharing are strategies
that have been explored in generic adult services in lowresource and middle-resource settings.448,449 Even in highresource settings, these strategies are an example of
entry-level, youth-integrated primary care models, which
can optimise the role of more specialised professionals
who are in short supply. In India, brief psychological
therapy delivered by lay health workers to young people
living with severe depression was found to be costeffective at both 3-month and 12-month follow-up from a

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

health system perspective, and was found to be costsaving when considering impacts on subsistence activity
and employment.450,451 Lay-delivered therapy to improve
adolescents’ self-reported psychosocial problems and
mental health symptoms has been found to be effective
and could be scaled up in India at a cost of US$4 per
student.337 Brief lay-delivered therapy for treatment of
depression in young people living with HIV in Uganda is
also highly cost-effective at $13 per DALY averted.452

Broader economic considerations
Despite evidence of effective and cost-effective
interventions and service delivery models, mental health
systems worldwide, even in high-resource settings, are
typically underfunded, unfair, and inefficient.453,454 These
systems fall short of delivering the health gains
theoretically attainable with current technologies.444,455,456
Although a major priority for system improvement
initiatives is to provide better and more timely support to
young people, achieving this goal requires addressing
challenges related to securing substantial additional
public investment and expanding the scope of the type of
economic research conducted in mental health.457
The economic evidence for mental health prevention
and treatment is already substantial, with more than
4000 reports published on this topic,211 but this evidence
principally examines questions of cost-effectiveness,
with budget effect questions underexplored. As a result,
more is known about the value for money of programmes
than about their affordability. This distinction is
important because many, perhaps most, cost-effective
youth mental health programmes are not cost-saving,
and a number are likely to be expensive to scale up,
particularly in cases where unmet need is high. Even
where programmes might potentially be cost-saving,
many of these benefits are not accrued to health systems,
but other sectors of the economy such as social welfare
systems. Measurement of these cross-sectoral impacts
could be improved through methodological innovations
such as broadening the cost perspectives of economic
evaluations and adopting cost–benefit and return of
investment analyses that provide actionable insights for
government decision makers in portfolios beyond health.
Methods such as Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis can
provide a formal means of integrating these effects with
other concerns of relevance to decision makers.458
The need for economic evaluations to better account
for demand and supply constraints is particularly
important in low-resource settings.459 Health systems and
contexts across the world are inherently different, and
generalisability is a challenge for economics research.
Arguably, this challenge is particularly important in
mental health, where both the epidemiology and service
response of often complex interventions are highly
contextual. Research into how context shapes resource
use and outcomes, however, is underdeveloped.460,461
Continuity of support is also an issue to consider in

economic analyses; fragmentation of youth mental
health support between child and adult service structures
can hinder effective implementation.291 As with health
care more broadly, aspects of the conduct and reporting
of economic evaluations in low-resource settings create
additional barriers to generalisability460 that can in part be
addressed by funding more high-quality economic
research in these contexts.
Major injections of public funding to provide costeffective, but initially expensive, youth mental health
service systems will require difficult choices about how
such funding is sourced (eg, reducing other areas of
public expenditure or levying additional taxes). If
effective, however, youth mental health care is much
more likely to deliver a major return on investment than
equivalent investments to treat other non-communicable
diseases in older adults, simply due to the timing of
mental illness compared with other non-communicable
diseases in the lifespan. Innovative financing arrange­
ments have been recommended as enablers of achieving
these gains, including pooled cross-sectoral funding,
social impact bonds, and systematic linking of health
technology assessment to funding decisions.457 Choices
involve normative judgements about the societal value of
young people’s mental health, and it has therefore been
argued that advocacy for additional resources should be
more explicitly grounded in moral values rather than
economics.462 Such a values-based framing aligns with
the major role that politics has on youth mental healthcare resource allocation decisions,463 even if how this
relationship works is perhaps inadequately understood.464
As David Haslam, former Chair of the National Institute
for Health and Care Excellence in the UK, pointed out in
his 2022 book, the value proposition of investing in
mental health, which has a lifelong impact due to its
emergence in young people, might represent a better
value proposition than very expensive late-stage cancer
treatments, for example, which at best prolong life by a
few months.465 Haslam contends that even if all cancers
were cured, only a few years would be added to the
already high life expectancy. The greatest gains in life
expectancy overall might now come from better mental
health care. This argument gives a clear example of the
difficult choices that are faced as health-care costs spiral
out of control. Such choices are being made covertly
already, which we would argue is driven by stigma and
prejudice in relation to the mentally ill, and these choices
have resulted in severe neglect of the mentally ill and
particularly young people. Low-value health care abounds
throughout health-care systems, including in areas of
mental health care, and it must be defined and
deprioritised.466 Although some people might find such
debates and choices confronting, the case made by
Haslam for a more rational allocation of resources and
prioritising primary, community, and mental health care,
is timely. Gawande’s classic work, Being Mortal: medicine
and what matters in the end, makes similar points

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

757

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

regarding a compassionate yet rational approach to endof-life care, in a moving and powerful way.467 Equity
and public health risks associated with defunding
programmes can be mitigated by ensuring that such
decisions are informed by robust and up-to-date health
technology assessment processes.
Policies to meaningfully reshape entire mental health
service systems should be grounded in appropriately
validated theories of how those systems behave and how
they are expected to respond to alternative policy settings,
such as changes to clinician incentives, budget constraints,
workforce supply, skills and scope of practice, increased
emphasis on prevention and early intervention, and
promoting greater use of digital mental health services.
Such whole system theories are currently fairly rare in
economic and epidemiological simulation models of
mental health,468 which have historically performed poorly
in predicting the population health effect of scaling up
investment in mental health.469 Economic research in
mental health over 3 decades has increased clarity about
the cost-effectiveness of individual prevention and
treatment strategies,211 yet modelling the behaviour of a
complex system is a very different and much longer-term
undertaking than looking at single strategies. Such
complex modelling calls for a field-building endeavour of
multidisciplinary researchers worldwide. Initial steps that
can be taken towards this technically challenging goal
include establishing collaborative networks of mental
health modellers and service planners,470 greater
understanding of the ethical risks associated with
inappropriate model implementation,471 and the
development of enabling technologies such as software
frameworks to facilitate transferable, open, and modular
model implementations.472 The scope of economic research
in mental health needs to expand into neglected areas such
as preferences, incentives, and behaviours; pricing
implementation risk; and developing novel financing
instruments, including value-based pricing or paying for
outcomes.
Crucially, a radical rethink is needed in terms of what is
meant by the mental health system. Mental health services
cannot operate in isolation, and they require improved
integration and coordination with general health services
and buy-in and political support of many different sectors
of the economy.473 Political arguments for investment in
mental health will need to be made across sectors,
especially as some of the key actions to protect mental
health must be implemented in other sectors, including
secure housing, equity in education, and social welfare
safety nets that guarantee a minimum income for families
and help young people remain in school, thus contributing
to the development of their mental capital. Specialist
education and employment services that support young
people to enter and stay in higher education or employment
are another important factor. These services have been
shown to be effective in supporting recovery in many
different health systems and welfare contexts,474 to be
758

cost-effective for adult populations,475 and to have growing
evidence of efficacy in youth populations.476 International
development agencies could also be a part of a mental
health system. Good mental health for young people is
already recognised as an important objective within the
UN’s Sustainable Development Goals, but translating
words into action can be helped by making moral
and economic arguments to major international
development agencies on the importance and value of
investing in youth mental health and reducing the harms
that undermine it.179
We have highlighted a broad evidence base of effective
and cost-effective interventions that can be rolled out in
high-resource settings as well as growing evidence on
interventions in low-resource and middle-resource
settings. Unfortunately, such interventions and services
are still not routinely available to most young people that
need them, even in high-resource settings. Achieving an
appropriately financed and organised mental health
system that improves the mental health of young people
is a challenge that is partly political and values-based and
partly about ensuring that solutions are adapted to local
needs and contexts. This challenge also requires
addressing some important knowledge gaps. Imple­
mentation will vary in pace and scope depending upon
the resources of the setting (eg, in low-resource settings,
access to all types of specialist care is low, and primary
and community health care workers are relied on even
more than in high-resource settings). More can also be
done to explore how to expand the appropriate use of
digital technologies, and much can be learnt in complex
systems from examples of effective delivery of mental
health services in low-resource settings.477 Meanwhile, in
all contexts, services will need to be developed in ways
that appeal to young people and that will lead to uptake
and sustained use by those who would most benefit.
Rising to the challenge requires a firm resolve to ensure
that what is currently known to be effective and costeffective is routinely implemented and delivered.
Additionally, this process involves setting an ambitious
research agenda by which new solutions, including
broader mental health-care system organisation and
financing innovations, are rigorously evaluated and
adopted if they are found to be effective, cost-effective,
and acceptable to young people. If we are to contain the
damaging economic consequences that mental ill health
in young people have on society, the harmful megatrends
identified herein must be addressed. A broader call to
action is urgently required to address the political, social,
cultural, and economic determinants of young people’s
mental health. Although progress on mental health
reform for young people is impossible in countries or
regions where survival is threatened, where human action
is leading to famine, or where basic human rights are
disregarded, powerful forces are at play even in
superficially intact societies. This knowledge requires not
only an economic perspective, but a political one as well.

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

Part 5: The political imperative
Introduction

Throughout the past decade, considerable progress has
occurred in the international recognition of the social
and economic importance of youth mental health by
governments, civil society, and the private sector.29,478
The alarming statistics and personal stories of rising
psychological distress among young people before and
during the COVID-19 pandemic have elevated the need
for action across the global community.479 In contrast to
the way governments around the world were galvanised
by the COVID-19 pandemic to respond to a health
crisis, the political momentum needed to drive policy
makers to act in a manner commensurate to the scale
and urgency of the problem has so far not materialised.
The major structural reforms needed to support young
people’s mental health across health care, education,
employment, and ongoing welfare support remain
largely unrealised. This structural reform has two
targets. The first is prevention, which now assumes
even greater priority and requires governmental and
community action across the broad range of social,
economic, and commercial determinants of health and
mental health. The second target is for youth mental
health care to be made a top priority in all systems of
health care around the world.
If the youth mental health crisis being amplified
during the global COVID-19 pandemic did not create
the imperative for sustained and systemic action, then
one might ask, what will? Translating words, media
events, international fora, celebrity endorsements, or
government promises into sustained societal and
political actions is never easy. As outlined in this section
and panel 6, emotionally engaging storytelling based
on a variety of lived experience, strong economic
arguments, clearly defined packaging of real-world
solutions, a key emphasis on prevention and early
intervention, high-profile societal champions, media
support, targeted campaigns, highly connected and
relational political persuasion and advocacy, and much
more aggressive grass-roots activism than we have seen
hitherto, perhaps following in the footsteps of young
climate activists, are all required to achieve transform­
ational reform. An accompanying policy brief is
available in the appendix (pp 1–13).

Strong economic arguments
Although the value proposition in human terms for
youth mental health care should be sufficient, the
economic argument for a return on investment in youth
mental health, delivered through enhanced participation
in education, training, and employment, is a strong
additional selling point.29,480 Yet buyers remain oddly
reluctant. The economic case for prioritising youth
mental health care should help policy makers to see that
investment in mental health is not poor or low-value
spending, and it should highlight how good youth mental

Panel 6: Requirements and options to achieve
transformational reform
Strong economic arguments
• Optimal way to achieve fast and sustainable growth in
national productivity and long-term mental wealth
Tractable (retail) solutions
• Dynamic model of regional care
• Model of care (such as those described in part 3)
• Delineation of care elements
• Digital technology support and tracking
Key emphasis on prevention and early intervention
• Investment in early intervention and secondary
prevention services
• Promotion of wider universal prevention strategies
Storytelling
• Lived experience advocates
Societal and political operatives that drive media
attention and political connections
• Broad range of public figures with high credibility
• Effective use of social media platforms
• Active relationships with key decision makers, not just in
health, but more importantly in finance and budget
controls
Grassroots activism and global organising
• Support for the coalition of young people, families, and
carers
• A relentless standing campaign
• Global networks of early adopters and pioneers
Real-world exemplars
• Local examples of service innovation that exemplify
better care models

health and wellbeing can be considered a national
resource to support productivity.383 In some countries,
political leaders, policy makers, and researchers have
described this concept as national mental wealth,481 and
New Zealand and Australia have even formulated
wellbeing budgets. Investing in youth mental health is
also advantageous because a return on investment can be
achieved within relatively short time frames compared
with longer-term but potentially valuable investments in
early child development, and it has fiscal benefits across
a wide range of portfolios (including health, justice, and
social welfare) and many subsequent years of influence
and reward, in contrast with investments in health care
during later stages of life, the benefits of which are
limited by the number of future productive years of life.

Real-world, locally relevant, and locally endorsed
solutions
Advocates can spend substantial energy on articulating
the challenge of youth mental ill health, but without

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

759

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

presenting practical and realistic solutions, it becomes
just one of a myriad of problems being presented to
governments and decision makers. For real-world
solutions, visible and scalable platforms for care in
communities are often best. Implementing proof-ofconcept in the real world, underpinned by a model of
care such as those described in part 3 but embedded
within the setting’s relevant social, cultural, geographical,
and workforce context, is a valuable step to scalable
solutions and their wider implementation.
Where a local solution carries the endorsement and
investment of researchers and different workforces,
professional groups, and young people and families with
lived experience, the case for decision makers to endorse
and scale up becomes even stronger. Although workforce
compositions will vary by country and even community,
interdisciplinary cooperation is important everywhere in
the world. Political imperatives are diminished where
there is fragmentation and siloing across key stakeholders
and by policy makers and commissioners of services.
Translating local solutions into national and regional
infrastructure can be achieved through dynamic
modelling that can then be used to show the scale,
timing, and sequencing of programme initiatives that are
required to achieve the specific outcomes,482 such as
reduced psychological distress, reduced suicidal
behaviour, or increased participation in education or
employment. These programmes can also be combined
with the development of long-term governance, imple­
mentation, and evaluation infrastructure to ensure their
sustainability. Establishing real-world examples of
clinical or technology-based service innovation is
essential. The extent to which solutions are also scalable
and relevant to the local context needs to be clearly
demonstrated to political leaders and decision makers.

Prevention and early intervention
The emphasis in youth mental health on prevention and
early intervention, as outlined in part 3, has remained
central to the political discourse in many countries.4,483
The opportunity to change the life course of young
people by intervening as early in the onset of mental
illness and as effectively as possible has wide political
and public appeal. Mental health promotion for young
people has been increasingly embedded within education
systems,330 with an emphasis on sleep hygiene, physical
activity, little alcohol and drug use, social connection, and
cognitive-behavioural skills. Addressing the social
determinants of poor mental health and suicide risk is
also gaining traction, particularly among governments
simultaneously seeking to address broader societal
imperatives that affect young people’s mental health,
such as unemployment, housing insecurity, and financial
distress. Approaches informed by ecological systems
theory484,485 could also help to mobilise the public and
politicians on youth mental health by focusing on
interventions that support young people directly, the
760

social determinants of mental health, and strengthening
the wider systems in which young people are embedded.486

The power of storytelling
Stories are essential to educate people and influence
decisions throughout society. The emotional engagement
and authenticity that flow from sharing lived experiences
of many varieties are essential to creating momentum
for reform, but this momentum dissipates when it is
limited to awareness raising alone and is disconnected
from other elements of strategy and calls to action.
Awareness without purpose is counterproductive when it
produces compassion fatigue and creates the false
impression that something is being done to address the
neglect and the crisis. Anti-stigma campaigns also run
these risks and are ineffective in isolation. One of the
best solutions to disease-related stigma, as previously
seen in epilepsy, tuberculosis, and leprosy, is the advent
of visibly effective treatment, which extends to
welcoming, compassionate, and effective models of care,
as witnessed with the scaling up of early intervention
services and youth primary care platforms.

High-profile societal champions and political
influencers
Linked to storytelling is sustained and high-quality media
attention, which is crucial to any political campaign.
Here, societal (eg, sport, entertainment, creative, fashion,
and lifestyle) and high-profile (past and current political)
champions, alongside the unified voice of genuine health
and research experts, play a key role in ensuring that a
message is received by a wider audience and appeals to
the public in order to gain support from policy makers.
This strategy should emphasise positive stories of
effective care and innovation, combined with credible
first-person accounts from service users and their
families and carers. In the age of social media and highly
segmented audiences, the effective real-time use of new
technologies and platforms is increasingly crucial.
Furthermore, widescale national change typically relies
on major decisions by the political leadership that
controls financial and budgetary decisions. Health is
often perceived by these groups as necessary but a poor
spend, yet health expenditure has been growing
inexorably worldwide to the point that it is becoming
unsustainable.465 In our view, spending seems to be based
less on logic and more on public sentiment and
emotion.465 Large sums are spent on high-tech hospitals,
very expensive cancer drugs, and a tranche of low-value
health care. Investments in primary and community
care, and particularly in mental health research and care,
have great potential value. These investments, however,
are neglected for a variety of reasons, including the needs
of politicians and vested professional and commercial
interests. Engagement and persuasion at the highest
levels of government, and through their advisors and
influencers, appear to be important but their productivity

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

is limited. Only when the community as a whole is
educated, persuaded, and expertly mobilised through the
strategies outlined here can transformation occur. This
transformation is achievable but requires a new
approach, as has been seen with climate change and the
tobacco and fast-food industries, where powerful vested
interests are involved. A value-based society and health
system is the context for such a transformation, and we
argue that activism is the missing strategy to attain it.

Grassroots activism and global organising
A common critique of modern governments is that
although they fail to lead, they are very responsive to
grassroots movements that threaten their political future.
Former UK prime minister Tony Blair’s official
spokesperson, Alastair Campbell, illustrates this concept
in his 2023 book, But What Can I Do?, and he offers
guidance as to how to become involved.487 New Power, by
Heimans and Timms,488 takes this concept further and
provides a radical guide to creating reform and real
change. To succeed, Heimans and Timms argue solid
advice and careful planning need to be underpinned by
aggressive, confident, and well organised grassroots
activism based on the real-life experiences of young
people who have lived with mental ill health, as well as
experiences of their families and carers. Although not all
young people will have lived experience of a mental
health condition,489 a large proportion of the population is
affected directly or indirectly by youth mental health
difficulties through their work, families, friends, or
community networks. The engagement of older age
groups, who are typically much more connected to active
decision makers in government, finance, and business,
should not be underestimated.
Sensitive promotion of the lived experiences of young
people and new solutions could also help to persuade the
public to advocate for better access to evidence-based
support, although careful consideration should be given
to whose lived experience is being promoted. In many
contexts, the voices of young people and those
with mental health conditions have historically been
marginalised. Many young people cannot participate in
elections or do not have the financial or network-driven
power to compete for attention or influence.490 Where
mental ill health intersects with its known drivers (such
as poverty and poor living standards, gender-based
violence, discrimination based on sexuality, gender
identity, and ethnicity), and where there is trauma from
colonisation, displacement, and violations of human
rights,491–496 opportunities for power are even more
diminished. Therefore, campaigns to raise the political
imperative must be as inclusive as possible of people
whose voices have been excluded, and must also be
careful not to place the onus on these young people to
fight the cause alone.488
Finally, all reforms are powered by a collective set of
principles and a shared mindset. The progress achieved

in building the youth mental health field to date has
flowed from the establishment of scientifically and
humanistically oriented global networks of pioneers,
leaders, and supporters who have come together through
a series of international forums over the past 25 years.
This movement began with the International Early
Psychosis Association in 1998, known since 2016 as IEPA
(the International Early Intervention and Prevention in
Mental Health Association), as well as, since 2010, the
International Association for Youth Mental Health.
Although these organisations are committed to science
and evidence, they are nevertheless operating in a
sociopolitical manner within professional and wider
fields, and are partnering with individuals with lived
experience and the public, to secure progress and build a
new field and culture of early intervention and youth
mental health.

For more on IEPA see
https://iepa.org.au/

Conclusion and call to action
A new field of youth mental health is being created, and
this endeavour must be accelerated, strengthened, and
prioritised. In this Commission, we have aimed to
capture the current state of this global endeavour,
examine the changing landscape of youth mental health,
acknowledge the threats and the opportunities within
this landscape, and begin to identify the underlying
megatrends influencing this change. The damage that
some combination of these megatrends is inflicting is
deep and widespread within societies and across the
globe. Arguably, young people communicate the warning
signs of our modern world, and are indicating that our
society and world are in serious trouble. This underlines
the central importance of taking a sophisticated,
sociopolitical perspective and developing a clear objective
supported by the most effective strategies and tactics.
Such a plan must also be soundly and scientifically based.
Conceptual building blocks and some of the perspectives
needed to build a new field of youth mental health are
innovations that have emerged. The principles, core
features, and strategies necessary for designing, testing,
and scaling up new models of youth mental health care
are becoming more widely accepted, and substantial
progress has been made in many jurisdictions. Although
the barriers and remaining gaps to progress are
considerable, definable solutions are available. The
economic dimension of youth mental health and the
politics of reform are where much energy needs to be
devoted, with activism based on the best science and the
safest policy to avoid mistakes and wrong turns. New
approaches to creating reform and real change488 must be
drawn upon, if youth mental health is to be transformed.
We have attempted to adopt as inclusive an approach as
possible to this global problem while recognising that
much of the data and practical reform has been limited
to high-resource and middle-resource settings. The
authorship and the model of producing this Commission
were formulated and agreed to try to maximise inclusivity,

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

761

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

but greatly enhanced efforts are needed to address and
strengthen youth mental health care in low-resource
settings. Even in the highest-resource settings, youth
mental health reform and care is still insufficient. In lowresource settings, where most of the young people in the
world are growing up, youth mental health reform is
only beginning and will need to adopt a modified strategy.
The youth mental health crisis is of the utmost
importance globally, given how dependent societies are
on the capacities and contributions of young people. As
long as so many emerging adults die prematurely, are
consigned to a life of welfare dependency, are denied
sufficient respect and nurture, and languish in precarity,
society itself will become more precarious. The youth
mental health crisis is more than a warning sign, and
now might be our last chance to act.
Contributors
PDM conceived this Commission. The Commission report was led by
the Commission editor (PDM), co-editors (EK, SNI, and CMe) and a
youth co-editor (ND), who wrote, edited, and integrated the manuscript
in collaboration with all section Commissioners and coauthors. The
Commission consisted of five parts, to which authors were assigned as
section Commissioners (lead authors), youth Commissioners, or
co-authors (appendix pp 17–18). Part 1 was led by BD and PBJ with input
from JF, IQN, MC, AD, TF, AJ, JTw, and AY. Part 2 was led by S-JB and
SW with input from KP, MRB, AMC, IBH, CK, and JLS. Part 3 was led
by PDM, EK, SNI, and M-AJ with input from ND, EG, EP, SH, SA,
AMC, MD, PPG, JH, FK-L, AMa, DHN, DR, JR, SS, IS, KT, LV, TvA, SV,
and JW. Part 4 was led by CMi and DM with input from FAEA, JTa,
MPH, and LK-DL. Part 5 was led by VB and IBH with input from AMo,
AH, EYHC, NMD, and PDM. All authors contributed to the writing of
their respective sections and reviewed, commented on, and approved the
final version of the Commission.
Declaration of interests
PDM is a founding director, patron, and former founding board member
of headspace. He is the executive director of Orygen, Australia’s National
Centre of Excellence in Youth Mental Health and lead agency for five
headspace centres across northwest Melbourne. He is a past President of
the International Association for Youth Mental Health, and a past
President of the IEPA; Early Intervention in Mental Health and of the
Schizophrenia International Research Society. S-JB has provided paid
expert witness work for UK charities and legal organisations. She is the
author of two books related to the brain, education, and learning, for
which she receives royalties. She gives talks in schools in the state and
private sector, at education conferences, for education organisations, and
for other public, private, and third sector organisations (some talks are
remunerated). She is a member of the Rethinking Assessment group, the
Steering Committee of the Cambridge Centre of Science Policy, the
Technical Advisory Group for the UK Government Department of
Education’s Education and Outcomes Panel-C Study, the Singapore
Government National Research Foundation Scientific Advisory Board,
and the Singapore Government Human Potential Scientific Advisory
Board. She was a member of the Times Education Commission
(2021–22). IBH has received honoraria for consultancy and educational
activities from Janssen Cilag. He was a member of the Clinical Advisory
Group for the evaluation of the Better Access to Psychiatrists,
Psychologists and General Practitioners through the Medicare Benefits
Schedule initiative, and is a member of Mental Health Reform Advisory
Committee (Department of Health). He is the Chief Scientific Advisor to
and a 3·2% equity shareholder in InnoWell, which aims to transform
mental health services through the use of innovative technologies.
FAEA has received honoraria for consultancy from Grand Challenges
Canada and is a past member of the World Economic Forum’s Global
Future Council on Mental Health. AMC is a director of headspace,
Australia’s National Youth Mental Health Foundation, and the National
Education Alliance for Borderline Personality Disorder. AD is the

762

Academic Secretary for the Royal College of Psychiatrists’ Faculty of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, a research advisory group member of the UK
National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, a member of
the UK Trauma Council, and an evidence panel member of the Early
Intervention Foundation. TF’s research group receives funding for
consultancy to Place2Be, a third sector organisation that provides mental
health training, support, and interventions to schools across the UK. JH is
executive director of Youth Wellness Hubs Ontario and receives funding
from Graham Boeckh Foundation and other donors through the Centre
for Addiction and Mental Health Foundation. AJ is a trustee of the
Samaritans and MQ. She has received fees for lecturing from the Scottish
Association of Mental Health. She is an advisory board member of Our
Future Health, UK. FK-L’s work is the subject of publishing contracts with
multiple companies in the EU, Magellan, Cobalt Therapeutics in the
USA, and the National Health Service in the UK. Although she has
received no remuneration to date, she might receive royalties in the
future. She is a non-executive director of Orygen. CK is the founder of
Wida, a digital mental health platform. He has received consulting fees
from the UN Children’s Fund. He has received grants from MQ:
Transforming Mental Health in the UK, the Royal Academy of
Engineering in the UK, the National Institutes of Health in the USA, the
Medical Research Council in the UK, and Fundação de Amparo à
Pesquisa do Estado do Rio Grande do Sul in Brazil. DR is a Chief
Scientific Advisor to headspace, Australia’s National Youth Mental Health
Foundation. JT receives book royalties from Simon and Schuster, legal
consulting fees from Bergman and Little and the Attorney General’s office
of the State of Tennessee, and honoraria for speaking engagements. EK is
the immediate past President of the IEPA: Early Intervention in Mental
Health, and during the period of the Commission was the President elect
and President. All other authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
PDM is supported by a National Health and Medical Research Council
(NHMRC) Senior Principal Research Fellowship (1155508). S-JB is
funded by the Wellcome Trust (WT107496/Z/15/Z), the UK Medical
Research Council (MRC), the Jacobs Foundation, the Wellspring
Foundation, and the University of Cambridge. IBH is supported by a
NHMRC Research Fellowship (1136259), an Investigator Grant
Leadership 3 (2016346), and a Centre for Research Excellence grant
(1171910 and 1061043). DM has received grants from Mental Health
Reform in Ireland, the UK Medical Research Council/Global Alliance for
Chronic Diseases and the Economic and Social Research Council/ Arts &
Humanities Research Council Global Challenges Research FundFAEA is
supported by funding from the Global Shapers Community. SA is
supported by the California Mental Health Services Oversight and
Accountability Commission. MRB’s research is funded by the Wolfson
Foundation, the Wellcome Trust, National Institutes of Health and
Research (NIHR), MRC, and the National Institutes of Health (NIH)/
National Institute of Mental Health. PPG holds grants from Grand
Challenges Canada and Wellcome. JH is supported by the Margaret and
Wallace McCain Centre for Child, Youth and Family Mental Health at the
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health. AJ receives funding from the
UKRI MRC through the DATAMIND HDR UK Mental Health Data Hub
(MRC reference: MR/W014386/1), the Wolfson Foundation on Children
and Young People’s Mental Health, and the Adolescent Mental Health
Data Platform, funded by MQ Mental Health Research Charity (Grant
Reference MQBF/3 ADP). FK-L is supported by an NHMRC Leadership
Fellowship. CK is a Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e
Tecnológico (CNPq, Brazil) researcher and a UK Academy of Medical
Sciences Newton Advanced Fellow. NMD’s research is funded by the
Health Research Board, Ireland. JR is supported by an NHMRC
Leadership Fellowship (2008460). JLS is supported by a clinician–scientist
salary award from the Fonds de Recherche du Québec–Santé. AY’s
research is funded by the NHMRC (Research Fellowship), NIHR (Senior
Investigator Grant), NIH, HeSANDA and RANZCP (Catalyst Grant).
SNI received salary support from the Canada Research Chair (CRC - Tier
1) programme and Fonds de Recherche du Québec–Santé. The funding
source had no role in the writing or publication of the manuscript.
References
1
Saunders DCKF, Knapp FM, Veenstra-VanderWeele J. Age-not just a
number in youth mental health. JAMA Psychiatry 2024; 81: 327–28.

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

2
3

4
5
6
7
8
9
10

11
12

13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

21
22
23
24
25
26
27

Brunette MF, Erlich MD, Edwards ML, et al. Addressing the
increasing mental health distress and mental illness among young
adults in the United States. J Nerv Ment Dis 2023; 211: 961–67.
Kieling C, Buchweitz C, Caye A, et al. Worldwide prevalence and
disability from mental disorders across childhood and adolescence:
evidence from the Global Burden of Disease study. JAMA Psychiatry
2024; 81: 347–56.
Office of the Surgeon General. Protecting youth mental health:
the U.S. Surgeon General’s advisory. Washington, DC: US
Department of Health and Human Services, 2021.
Rutter M, Smith DJ, eds. Psychosocial disorders in young people:
time trends and their causes. Chichester, West Sussex: John Wiley
& Sons Ltd, 1995.
Patton GC, Sawyer SM, Santelli JS, et al. Our future: a Lancet
Commission on adolescent health and wellbeing. Lancet 2016;
387: 2423–78.
Solmi M, Radua J, Olivola M, et al. Age at onset of mental disorders
worldwide: large-scale meta-analysis of 192 epidemiological studies.
Mol Psychiatry 2022; 27: 281–95.
Arnett JJ. Emerging adulthood. A theory of development from the
late teens through the twenties. Am Psychol 2000; 55: 469–80.
Arnett JJ. Emerging adulthood: the winding road from the late
teens through the twenties. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
Twenge JM. iGen: why today’s super-connected kids are growing up
less rebellious, more tolerant, less happy—and completely
unprepared for adulthood—and what that means for the rest of us.
New York, NY: Simon & Schuster 2017.
Haidt J. The anxious generation: how the great rewiring of
childhood is causing an epidemic of mental illness. New York, NY:
Penguin, 2024.
Cosma A, Stevens GWJM, Vollebergh WAM, De Looze M. Time
trends in schoolwork pressure among Dutch adolescents, 2001-2017:
gender and educational differences. Scand J Public Health 2022;
50: 538–41.
Worthman CM, Trang K. Dynamics of body time, social time and
life history at adolescence. Nature 2018; 554: 451–57.
Pennington A. Gen F’d? How young Australians can reclaim their
uncertain futures. Melbourne, VIC: Hardie Grant Books, 2023.
Twenge JM, Park H. The decline in adult activities among U.S.
adolescents, 1976–2016. Child Dev 2019; 90: 638–54.
VicHealth, CSIRO. Bright futures: megatrends impacting the
mental wellbeing of young Victorians over the coming 20 years.
Melbourne, VIC: Victorian Health Promotion Foundation, 2015.
Twenge JM. Generations: the real differences between Gen Z,
Millennials, Gen X, Boomers, and Silents—and what they mean for
America’s future. New York, NY: Atria Books, 2023.
Duffy B. Generations: does when you’re born shape who you are?
London: Atlantic Books, 2021.
Vespa J. The changing economics and demographics of young
adulthood: 1975–2016. Suitland, Maryland: U.S. Census Bureau, 2017.
Gagné T, Sacker A, Schoon I. Changes in patterns of social role
combinations at ages 25-26 among those growing up in England
between 1996 and 2015-16: evidence from the 1970 British Cohort
and Next Steps Studies. J Youth Adolesc 2021; 50: 2052–66.
Arnett JJ, Žukauskienė R, Sugimura K. The new life stage of
emerging adulthood at ages 18-29 years: implications for mental
health. Lancet Psychiatry 2014; 1: 569–76.
Sawyer SM, Azzopardi PS, Wickremarathne D, Patton GC. The age
of adolescence. Lancet Child Adolesc Health 2018; 2: 223–28.
Gibb SJ, Fergusson DM, Horwood LJ. Burden of psychiatric
disorder in young adulthood and life outcomes at age 30.
Br J Psychiatry 2010; 197: 122–27.
Dalsgaard S, McGrath J, Østergaard SD, et al. Association of mental
disorder in childhood and adolescence with subsequent educational
achievement. JAMA Psychiatry 2020; 77: 797–805.
Moffitt TE, Caspi A. Psychiatry’s opportunity to prevent the rising
burden of age-related disease. JAMA Psychiatry 2019; 76: 461–62.
UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs. World population
prospects 2022: summary of results. New York: United Nations,
2022.
IStat. Demographic indicators. http://dati.istat.it/Index.
aspx?DataSetCode=DCIS_INDDEMOG1&Lang=en (accessed
Jan 8, 2024).

28

29
30

31
32
33

34
35
36

37

38
39

40
41
42

43
44

45

46
47
48

The World Bank. Age dependency ratio (% of working-age
population). 2022. https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.
DPND?end=2022&most_recent_year_desc=false&start=1960&type=
points&view=chart (accessed Jan 16, 2024).
Killackey E, Hodges C, Browne V, et al. A global framework for youth
mental health: investing in future mental capital for individuals,
communities and economies. Geneva: World Economic Forum, 2020.
Castelpietra G, Knudsen AKS, Agardh EE, et al. The burden of
mental disorders, substance use disorders and self-harm among
young people in Europe, 1990–2019: findings from the Global
Burden of Disease study 2019. Lancet Reg Health Eur 2022;
16: 100341.
Erskine HE, Moffitt TE, Copeland WE, et al. A heavy burden on
young minds: the global burden of mental and substance use
disorders in children and youth. Psychol Med 2015; 45: 1551–63.
Neufeld SAS. The burden of young people’s mental health
conditions in Europe: no cause for complacency.
Lancet Reg Health Eur 2022; 16: 100364.
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. Deaths in Australia.
July 11, 2023. https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports/life-expectancydeath/deaths-in-australia/contents/leading-causes-of-death
(accessed Nov 23, 2023).
Child and Youth Mortality Review Committee. 15th data report:
2015–19. Wellington: Health Quality & Safety Commission
New Zealand, 2021.
Dandona R, Kumar GA, Dhaliwal RS, et al. Gender differentials and
state variations in suicide deaths in India: the Global Burden of
Disease study 1990-2016. Lancet Public Health 2018; 3: e478–89.
Government of Canada. Suicide in Canada: key statistics
(infographic). Jan 9, 2023. https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/
services/publications/healthy-living/suicide-canada-key-statisticsinfographic.html (accessed Nov 23, 2023).
US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Leading causes of
death and injury, 2023. https://wisqars.cdc.gov/lcd/?o=LCD&y1=20
22&y2=2022&ct=10&cc=ALL&g=00&s=0&r=0&ry=2&e=0&ar=
lcd1age&at=groups&ag=lcd1age&a1=0&a2=199 (accessed
Nov 23, 2023).
Bertuccio P, Amerio A, Grande E, et al. Global trends in youth
suicide from 1990 to 2020: an analysis of data from the WHO
mortality database. EClinicalMedicine 2024; 70: 102506.
Stefanac N, Hetrick S, Hulbert C, Spittal MJ, Witt K, Robinson J.
Are young female suicides increasing? A comparison of sex-specific
rates and characteristics of youth suicides in Australia over
2004–2014. BMC Public Health 2019; 19: 1389.
WHO. Suicide. Aug 28, 2023. https://www.who.int/news-room/factsheets/detail/suicide (accessed Nov 23, 2023).
Silva PJdC, Feitosa RA, Machado MF, et al. Perfil epidemiológico e
tendência temporal da mortalidade por suicício em adolescentes.
J Bras Psiquiatr 2021; 70: 224–35.
Li L, Xu G, Yang H, et al. Temporal trends in suicide attempts
among adolescents aged 12-15 years from 12 low- and middleincome countries. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 2022;
57: 2267–77.
Troya MI, Spittal MJ, Pendrous R, et al. Suicide rates amongst
individuals from ethnic minority backgrounds: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. EClinicalMedicine 2022; 47: 101399.
McGrath JJ, Al-Hamzawi A, Alonso J, et al. Age of onset and
cumulative risk of mental disorders: a cross-national analysis of
population surveys from 29 countries. Lancet Psychiatry 2023;
10: 668–81.
Caspi A, Houts RM, Ambler A, et al. Longitudinal assessment of
mental health disorders and comorbidities across 4 decades among
participants in the Dunedin birth cohort study. JAMA Netw Open
2020; 3: e203221.
Gandhi E, OGradey-Lee M, Jones A, Hudson JL. Receipt of
evidence-based care for children and adolescents with anxiety in
Australia. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2022; 56: 1463–76.
Cummings JR, Ji X, Lally C, Druss BG. Racial and ethnic differences
in minimally adequate depression care among Medicaid-enrolled
youth. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2019; 58: 128–38.
Sawyer MG, Reece CE, Sawyer ACP, Hiscock H, Lawrence D.
Adequacy of treatment for child and adolescent mental disorders in
Australia: a national study. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2019; 53: 326–35.

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

763

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

49

50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57

58

59

60
61
62
63
64

65

66

67

68

69

764

Zhou W, Ouyang F, Nergui O-E, et al. Child and adolescent mental
health policy in low- and middle-income countries: challenges and
lessons for policy development and implementation.
Front Psychiatry 2020; 11: 150.
Thornicroft G, Chatterji S, Evans-Lacko S, et al. Undertreatment of
people with major depressive disorder in 21 countries.
Br J Psychiatry 2017; 210: 119–24.
Erskine HE, Baxter AJ, Patton G, et al. The global coverage of
prevalence data for mental disorders in children and adolescents.
Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci 2017; 26: 395–402.
Lund C, Brooke-Sumner C, Baingana F, et al. Social determinants
of mental disorders and the Sustainable Development Goals:
a systematic review of reviews. Lancet Psychiatry 2018; 5: 357–69.
Thornicroft G, Sunkel C, Alikhon Aliev A, et al. The Lancet
Commission on ending stigma and discrimination in mental
health. Lancet 2022; 400: 1438–80.
Gunn J. Foreword. In: Bailey S, Dolan M, eds. Adolescent forensic
psychiatry. London: Arnold, 2004: xi.
McGorry PD, Coghill D, Berk M. Mental health of young
Australians: dealing with a public health crisis. Med J Aust 2023;
219: 246–49.
Office of the Surgeon General. Social media and youth mental
health: the U.S. Surgeon General’s advisory. Washington, DC: US
Department of Health and Human Services, 2023.
Gao CX, Teo SM, Brennan N, Fava N, Freeburn T, Filia K. Climate
concerns and young people’s mental health: findings from the 2022
Mission Australia Youth Survey. Melbourne, VIC and Sydney, NSW:
Orygen and Mission Australia, 2023.
Filia KM, Teo SM, Brennan N, et al. Interrelationships between
social exclusion, mental health and wellbeing in adolescents:
insights from a national youth survey. PsyArXiv 2023; published
online Sept 26, 2023. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/4zgcy
(preprint).
Australian Bureau of Statistics. National Study of Mental Health
and Wellbeing. Oct 5, 2023. https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/
health/mental-health/national-study-mental-health-and-wellbeing/
latest-release (accessed Nov 23, 2023).
Youth in Mind. Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire. 2022.
https://www.sdqinfo.org/py/sdqinfo/b3.py?language=Englishqz
(Austral) (accessed Feb 3, 2024).
Youth in Mind. Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire, for
scoring. 2022 https://sdqinfo.org/py/sdqinfo/b3.
py?language=Englishqz(UK) (accessed Feb 3, 2024).
QualityMetric. The SF-12v2 PRO Health Survey. 2013. https://www.
qualitymetric.com/health-surveys/the-sf-12v2-pro-health-survey/
(accessed Feb 3, 2024).
US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. YRBSS
Questionnaires. 2023. https://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/data/
yrbs/index.htm (accessed Feb 3, 2024).
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
National survey on drug use and health. 2022. https://www.samhsa.
gov/data/data-we-collect/nsduh-national-survey-drug-use-andhealth (accessed Feb 3, 2024).
Merikangas KR, Avenevoli S, Costello EJ, Koretz D, Kessler RC.
National comorbidity survey replication adolescent supplement
(NCS-A): I. Background and measures.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2009; 48: 367–79.
Jensen HAR, Davidsen M, Møller SR, et al. Danskernes sundhed –
Den Nationale Sundhedsprofil 2021. March 9, 2022. https://www.
sst.dk/da/udgivelser/2022/danskernes-sundhed (accessed
Oct 12, 2023).
National Health Service England. Mental health of children and
young people in England 2022 - wave 3 follow up to the 2017 survey.
Nov 29, 2022. https://digital.nhs.uk/data-and-information/
publications/statistical/mental-health-of-children-and-youngpeople-in-england/2022-follow-up-to-the-2017-survey# (accessed
Nov 23, 2023).
Twenge JM, Joiner TE, Rogers ML, Martin GN. Increases in
depressive symptoms, suicide-related outcomes, and suicide rates
among U.S. adolescents after 2010 and links to increased new
media screen time. Clin Psychol Sci 2018; 6: 3–17.
Naghavi M. Global, regional, and national burden of suicide
mortality 1990 to 2016: systematic analysis for the Global Burden of
Disease Study 2016. BMJ 2019; 364: l94.

70
71
72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80
81
82
83

84

85

86
87
88

89

Armitage JM, Kwong ASF, Tseliou F, et al. Cross-cohort change in
parent-reported emotional problem trajectories across childhood
and adolescence in the UK. Lancet Psychiatry 2023; 10: 509–17.
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. Young Australians: their
health and wellbeing 2011. Canberra, ACT: Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare, 2011.
Kumar M, Akbarialiabad H, Kouhanjani MF, et al. Association of
major disease outbreaks with adolescent and youth mental health in
low- and middle-income countries: a systematic scoping review.
JAMA Psychiatry 2022; 79: 1232–40.
Shevlin M, Butter S, McBride O, et al. Refuting the myth of a
‘tsunami’ of mental ill-health in populations affected by COVID-19:
evidence that response to the pandemic is heterogeneous, not
homogeneous. Psychol Med 2023; 53: 429–37.
Sun Y, Wu Y, Fan S, et al. Comparison of mental health symptoms
before and during the COVID-19 pandemic: evidence from a
systematic review and meta-analysis of 134 cohorts. BMJ 2023;
380: e074224.
Butterworth P, Schurer S, Trinh T-A, Vera-Toscano E, Wooden M.
Effect of lockdown on mental health in Australia: evidence from a
natural experiment analysing a longitudinal probability sample
survey. Lancet Public Health 2022; 7: e427–36.
Madigan S, Korczak DJ, Vaillancourt T, et al. Comparison of
paediatric emergency department visits for attempted suicide,
self-harm, and suicidal ideation before and during the COVID-19
pandemic: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry
2023; 10: 342–51.
Madigan S, Racine N, Vaillancourt T, et al. Changes in depression
and anxiety among children and adolescents from before to during
the COVID-19 pandemic: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
JAMA Pediatr 2023; 177: 567–81.
Wilkins R, Vera-Toscano E, Botha F, Wooden M, Trinh T-A.
The household, income and labour dynamics in Australia Survey:
selected findings from waves 1 to 20. Melbourne, VIC: Melbourne
Institute—Applied Economic & Social Research, 2022.
Santomauro DF, Mantilla Herrera AM, Shadid J, et al. Global
prevalence and burden of depressive and anxiety disorders in
204 countries and territories in 2020 due to the COVID-19
pandemic. Lancet 2021; 398: 1700–12.
Creswell C, Shum A, Pearcey S, Skripkauskaite S, Patalay P,
Waite P. Young people’s mental health during the COVID-19
pandemic. Lancet Child Adolesc Health 2021; 5: 535–37.
Liang L, Ren H, Cao R, et al. The effect of COVID-19 on youth
mental health. Psychiatr Q 2020; 91: 841–52.
Biddle N, Edwards B, Gray M, Rehill P. Wellbeing outcomes in
Australia as lockdowns ease and cases increase – August 2022.
Canberra, ACT: Australian National University, 2022.
Biswas T, Scott JG, Munir K, et al. Global variation in the prevalence
of suicidal ideation, anxiety and their correlates among adolescents:
a population based study of 82 countries. EClinicalMedicine 2020;
24: 100395.
Erskine HE, Maravilla JC, Wado YD, et al. Prevalence of
adolescent mental disorders in Kenya, Indonesia, and Viet Nam
measured by the National Adolescent Mental Health Surveys
(NAMHS): a multi-national cross-sectional study. Lancet 2024;
403: 1671–80.
Yatham S, Sivathasan S, Yoon R, da Silva TL, Ravindran AV.
Depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder among
youth in low and middle income countries: a review of
prevalence and treatment interventions. Asian J Psychiatr 2018;
38: 78–91.
Smith L, López Sánchez GF, Pizzol D, et al. Global time trends of
perceived loneliness among adolescents from 28 countries in
Africa, Asia, and the Americas. J Affect Disord 2024; 346: 192–99.
Jörns-Presentati A, Napp A-K, Dessauvagie AS, et al. The prevalence
of mental health problems in sub-Saharan adolescents: a systematic
review. PLoS One 2021; 16: e0251689.
Matandika I, Mategula D, Kasenda S, Adeniyi Y, Muula A.
Prevalence and correlates of common mental disorders among
children and adolescents in Blantyre-Urban, Malawi. Malawi Med J
2022; 34: 105–10.
Angeles G, de Hoop J, Handa S, Kilburn K, Milazzo A, Peterman A.
Government of Malawi’s unconditional cash transfer improves
youth mental health. Soc Sci Med 2019; 225: 108–19.

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

90

Maalouf FT, Alrojolah L, Akoury-Dirani L, et al. Psychopathology in
children and adolescents in Lebanon study (PALS): a national
household survey. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 2022;
57: 761–74.
91 Doyle AM, Bandason T, Dauya E, et al. Common mental health and
emotional and behavioural disorders among adolescents and young
adults in Harare and Mashonaland East, Zimbabwe: a populationbased prevalence study. BMJ Open 2023; 13: e065276.
92 Ma J, Mahat P, Brøndbo PH, Handegård BH, Kvernmo S, Javo AC.
Parent reports of children’s emotional and behavioral problems in a
low- and middle- income country (LMIC): an epidemiological study
of Nepali schoolchildren. PLoS One 2021; 16: e0255596.
93 Collishaw S, Sellers R. Trends in child and adolescent mental health
prevalence, outcomes, and inequalities. In: Taylor E, Verhulst F,
Wong JCM, Yoshida K, eds. Mental health and illness of children
and adolescents. Singapore: Springer Singapore 2020: 63–73.
94 Foulkes L. What mental illness really is… (and what it isn’t).
London: Random House, 2021.
95 Foulkes L, Stringaris A. Do no harm: can school mental health
interventions cause iatrogenic harm? BJPsych Bull 2023; 47: 267–69.
96 Foulkes L, Andrews JL. Are mental health awareness efforts
contributing to the rise in reported mental health problems? A call
to test the prevalence inflation hypothesis. New Ideas Psychol 2023;
69: 101010.
97 Frances A. Saving normal: an insider’s revolt against out-of-control
psychiatric diagnosis, DSM-5, big pharma, and the medicalization
of ordinary life. New York, NY: William Morrow, 2013.
98 Kuyken W, Ball S, Crane C, et al. Effectiveness and costeffectiveness of universal school-based mindfulness training
compared with normal school provision in reducing risk of mental
health problems and promoting well-being in adolescence: the
MYRIAD cluster randomised controlled trial.
Evid Based Ment Health 2022; 25: 99–109.
99 Wasserman D, Hoven CW, Wasserman C, et al. School-based
suicide prevention programmes: the SEYLE cluster-randomised,
controlled trial. Lancet 2015; 385: 1536–44.
100 Higgen S, Mueller JT, Mösko M. Review: Universal mental health
interventions for young students in adverse environments a systematic review of evaluated interventions.
Child Adolesc Ment Health 2022; 27: 281–93.
101 Cuijpers P. Examining the effects of prevention programs on the
incidence of new cases of mental disorders: the lack of statistical
power. Am J Psychiatry 2003; 160: 1385–91.
102 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Youth risk behavior
survey: data summary and trends report, 2011-2021. Atlanta, GA: US
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2023.
103 Seligman ME, Steen TA, Park N, Peterson C. Positive psychology
progress: empirical validation of interventions. Am Psychol 2005;
60: 410–21.
104 Tejada-Gallardo C, Blasco-Belled A, Torrelles-Nadal C, Alsinet C.
Effects of school-based multicomponent positive psychology
interventions on well-being and distress in adolescents: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Youth Adolesc 2020; 49: 1943–60.
105 Bolier L, Haverman M, Westerhof GJ, Riper H, Smit F,
Bohlmeijer E. Positive psychology interventions: a meta-analysis of
randomized controlled studies. BMC Public Health 2013; 13: 119.
106 Seligman MEP, Ernst RM, Gillham J, Reivich K, Linkins M. Positive
education: positive psychology and classroom interventions.
Oxf Rev Educ 2009; 35: 293–311.
107 Campbell J. The hero with a thousand faces, 3rd edn. Novato, CA:
New World Library, 2008.
108 Masten AS. Global perspectives on resilience in children and youth.
Child Dev 2014; 85: 6–20.
109 Masten AS, Lucke CM, Nelson KM, Stallworthy IC. Resilience in
development and psychopathology: multisystem perspectives.
Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2021; 17: 521–49.
110 Tedeschi RG, Shakespeare-Finch J, Taku K, Calhoun LG.
Posttraumatic growth: theory, research, and applications. New York,
NY: Routledge, 2018.
111 Taleb NN. Antifragile: things that gain from disorder. London:
Penguin Random House, 2012.
112 Steinberg L, Icenogle G, Shulman EP, et al. Around the world,
adolescence is a time of heightened sensation seeking and
immature self-regulation. Dev Sci 2018; 21: e12532.

113 Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler O, Jin R, Merikangas KR,
Walters EE. Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of
DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.
Arch Gen Psychiatry 2005; 62: 593–602.
114 Dai J, Scherf KS. Puberty and functional brain development in
humans: convergence in findings? Dev Cogn Neurosci 2019;
39: 100690.
115 Vijayakumar N, Op de Macks Z, Shirtcliff EA, Pfeifer JH. Puberty
and the human brain: insights into adolescent development.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2018; 92: 417–36.
116 Goddings A-L, Mills K, Clasen L, Giedd J, Viner R, Blakemore S-J.
Longitudinal MRI to assess effect of puberty on subcortical brain
development: an observational study. Lancet 2014; 383: S52.
117 Goddings A-L, Beltz A, Peper JS, Crone EA, Braams BR.
Understanding the role of puberty in structural and functional
development of the adolescent brain. J Res Adolesc 2019; 29: 32–53.
118 Pfeifer JH, Allen NB. Puberty initiates cascading relationships
between neurodevelopmental, social, and internalizing processes
across adolescence. Biol Psychiatry 2021; 89: 99–108.
119 Joinson C, Heron J, Araya R, et al. Association between pubertal
development and depressive symptoms in girls from a UK cohort.
Psychol Med 2012; 42: 2579–89.
120 Mendle J, Beam CR, McKone KMP, Koch MK. Puberty and
transdiagnostic risks for mental health. J Res Adolesc 2020;
30: 687–705.
121 Ullsperger JM, Nikolas MA. A meta-analytic review of the
association between pubertal timing and psychopathology in
adolescence: are there sex differences in risk? Psychol Bull 2017;
143: 903–38.
122 Foulkes L, Blakemore S-J. Studying individual differences in
human adolescent brain development. Nat Neurosci 2018;
21: 315–23.
123 Mills KL, Goddings A-L, Herting MM, et al. Structural brain
development between childhood and adulthood: convergence across
four longitudinal samples. Neuroimage 2016; 141: 273–81.
124 Tamnes CK, Herting MM, Goddings AL, et al. Development of the
cerebral cortex across adolescence: a multisample study of interrelated longitudinal changes in cortical volume, surface area, and
thickness. J Neurosci 2017; 37: 3402–12.
125 Larsen B, Luna B. Adolescence as a neurobiological critical period
for the development of higher-order cognition.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2018; 94: 179–95.
126 Tamnes CK, Walhovd KB, Dale AM, et al. Brain development and
aging: overlapping and unique patterns of change. Neuroimage
2013; 68: 63–74.
127 Crone EA, Dahl RE. Understanding adolescence as a period of
social-affective engagement and goal flexibility. Nat Rev Neurosci
2012; 13: 636–50.
128 Bethlehem RAI, Seidlitz J, White SR, et al. Brain charts for the
human lifespan. Nature 2022; 604: 525–33.
129 Herting MM, Johnson C, Mills KL, et al. Development of subcortical
volumes across adolescence in males and females: a multisample
study of longitudinal changes. Neuroimage 2018; 172: 194–205.
130 Mills KL, Goddings AL, Clasen LS, Giedd JN, Blakemore SJ.
The developmental mismatch in structural brain maturation during
adolescence. Dev Neurosci 2014; 36: 147–60.
131 Lam CB, McHale SM, Crouter AC. Time with peers from middle
childhood to late adolescence: developmental course and
adjustment correlates. Child Dev 2014; 85: 1677–93.
132 van den Bos W. Neural mechanisms of social reorientation across
adolescence. J Neurosci 2013; 33: 13581–82.
133 Nelson EE, Leibenluft E, McClure EB, Pine DS. The social
re-orientation of adolescence: a neuroscience perspective on the
process and its relation to psychopathology. Psychol Med 2005;
35: 163–74.
134 Larson R, Richards MH. Daily companionship in late childhood
and early adolescence: changing developmental contexts. Child Dev
1991; 62: 284–300.
135 De Goede IHA, Branje SJT, Delsing MJMH, Meeus WHJ. Linkages
over time between adolescents’ relationships with parents and
friends. J Youth Adolesc 2009; 38: 1304–15.
136 Molleman L, Ciranka S, van den Bos W. Social influence in
adolescence as a double-edged sword. Proc Biol Sci 2022;
289: 20220045.

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

765

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

137 Peake SJ, Dishion TJ, Stormshak EA, Moore WE, Pfeifer JH.
Risk-taking and social exclusion in adolescence: neural
mechanisms underlying peer influences on decision-making.
Neuroimage 2013; 82: 23–34.
138 Sebastian CL, Tan GCY, Roiser JP, Viding E, Dumontheil I,
Blakemore S-J. Developmental influences on the neural bases of
responses to social rejection: implications of social neuroscience for
education. Neuroimage 2011; 57: 686–94.
139 Somerville LH. Special issue on the teenage brain: sensitivity to
social evaluation. Curr Dir Psychol Sci 2013; 22: 121–27.
140 Foulkes L, Blakemore S-J. Is there heightened sensitivity to social
reward in adolescence? Curr Opin Neurobiol 2016; 40: 81–85.
141 Blakemore S-J, Mills KL. Is adolescence a sensitive period for
sociocultural processing? Annu Rev Psychol 2014; 65: 187–207.
142 Blakemore S-J. Avoiding social risk in adolescence.
Curr Dir Psychol Sci 2018; 27: 116–22.
143 Kwon S-J, Telzer EH. Social contextual risk taking in adolescence.
Nat Rev Psychol 2022; 1: 393–406.
144 Tervo-Clemmens B, Calabro FJ, Parr AC, Fedor J, Foran W, Luna B.
A canonical trajectory of executive function maturation from
adolescence to adulthood. Nat Commun 2023; 14: 6922.
145 Constantinidis C, Luna B. Neural substrates of inhibitory control
maturation in adolescence. Trends Neurosci 2019; 42: 604–16.
146 Crone EA, Steinbeis N. Neural perspectives on cognitive control
development during childhood and adolescence. Trends Cogn Sci
2017; 21: 205–15.
147 Luna B, Marek S, Larsen B, Tervo-Clemmens B, Chahal R.
An integrative model of the maturation of cognitive control.
Annu Rev Neurosci 2015; 38: 151–70.
148 Nigg JT. Annual research review: on the relations among selfregulation, self-control, executive functioning, effortful control,
cognitive control, impulsivity, risk-taking, and inhibition for
developmental psychopathology. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2017;
58: 361–83.
149 Silvers JA. Adolescence as a pivotal period for emotion regulation
development. Curr Opin Psychol 2022; 44: 258–63.
150 Dumontheil I, Apperly IA, Blakemore S-J. Online usage of theory of
mind continues to develop in late adolescence. Dev Sci 2010;
13: 331–38.
151 Guazzelli Williamson V, Mills KL. Mentalizing strategies for
navigating the social world in adolescence. Infant Child Dev 2023;
32: e2374.
152 Lees B, Meredith LR, Kirkland AE, Bryant BE, Squeglia LM. Effect
of alcohol use on the adolescent brain and behavior.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2020; 192: 172906.
153 Oliveira C, Fonseca G, Sotero L, Crespo C, Relvas AP. Family
dynamics during emerging adulthood: reviewing, integrating, and
challenging the field. J Fam Theory Rev 2020; 12: 350–67.
154 Swartz TT, Kim M, Uno M, Mortimer J, O’Brien KB. Safety nets
and scaffolds: parental support in the transition to adulthood.
J Marriage Fam 2011; 73: 414–29.
155 di Giacomo E, Krausz M, Colmegna F, Aspesi F, Clerici M.
Estimating the risk of attempted suicide among sexual minority
youths: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Pediatr 2018;
172: 1145–52.
156 Chum A, Kim C, Nielsen A, et al. Disparities in suicide-related
behaviors across sexual orientations by gender: a retrospective
cohort study using linked health administrative data.
Am J Psychiatry 2023; 180: 660–67.
157 Wittlin NM, Kuper LE, Olson KR. Mental health of transgender and
gender diverse youth. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2023; 19: 207–32.
158 Herman JL, Flores AR, O’Neill KK. How many adults and youth
identify as transgender in the United States? Los Angeles, CA:
The Williams Institute, 2022.
159 Drescher J, Cohen-Kettenis PT, Reed GM. Gender incongruence of
childhood in the ICD-11: controversies, proposal, and rationale.
Lancet Psychiatry 2016; 3: 297–304.
160 Konrad K, Behrendt HF. How are developing social relationships
relevant to risks and resilience in youth mental health? In: Uhlhaas
PJ, Wood SJ, eds. Youth mental health: a paradigm for prevention
and early intervention. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; 2020: 63–78.
161 Cauce AM, Domenech-Rodríguez M, Paradise M, et al. Cultural and
contextual influences in mental health help seeking: a focus on
ethnic minority youth. J Consult Clin Psychol 2002; 70: 44–55.
766

162 Elfenbein HA, Ambady N. On the universality and cultural
specificity of emotion recognition: a meta-analysis. Psychol Bull
2002; 128: 203–35.
163 Uchida Y, Kitayama S. Happiness and unhappiness in east and
west: themes and variations. Emotion 2009; 9: 441–56.
164 Li SC. Biocultural orchestration of developmental plasticity across
levels: the interplay of biology and culture in shaping the mind and
behavior across the life span. Psychol Bull 2003; 129: 171–94.
165 Vogeley K, Roepstorff A. Contextualising culture and social
cognition. Trends Cogn Sci 2009; 13: 511–16.
166 Sirin SR, Ryce P, Gupta T, Rogers-Sirin L. The role of acculturative
stress on mental health symptoms for immigrant adolescents:
a longitudinal investigation. Dev Psychol 2013; 49: 736–48.
167 Snowshoe A, Crooks CV, Tremblay PF, Hinson RE. Cultural
connectedness and its relation to mental wellness for First Nations
youth. J Prim Prev 2017; 38: 67–86.
168 Ungar M, Liebenberg L. Assessing resilience across cultures using
mixed methods: construction of the child and youth resilience
measure. J Mixed Methods Res 2011; 5: 126–49.
169 Krieg B. Understanding the role of cultural continuity in reclaiming
the identity of young Indigenous women. Girlhood Stud 2016;
9: 28–45.
170 Rivas-Drake D, Seaton EK, Markstrom C, et al. Ethnic and racial
identity in adolescence: implications for psychosocial, academic,
and health outcomes. Child Dev 2014; 85: 40–57.
171 Usborne E, Taylor DM. The role of cultural identity clarity for selfconcept clarity, self-esteem, and subjective well-being.
Pers Soc Psychol Bull 2010; 36: 883–97.
172 Chandler MJ, Lalonde C. Cultural continuity as a hedge against
suicide in Canada’s First Nations. Transcult Psychiatry 1998;
35: 191–219.
173 Misra S, Jackson VW, Chong J, et al. Systematic review of cultural
aspects of stigma and mental illness among racial and ethnic
minority groups in the United States: implications for
interventions. Am J Community Psychol 2021; 68: 486–512.
174 Ran M-S, Hall BJ, Su TT, et al. Stigma of mental illness and cultural
factors in Pacific Rim region: a systematic review. BMC Psychiatry
2021; 21: 8.
175 Carpenter-Song E, Chu E, Drake RE, Ritsema M, Smith B,
Alverson H. Ethno-cultural variations in the experience and
meaning of mental illness and treatment: implications for access
and utilization. Transcult Psychiatry 2010; 47: 224–51.
176 Mojaverian T, Hashimoto T, Kim HS. Cultural differences in
professional help seeking: a comparison of Japan and the U.S.
Front Psychol 2013; 3: 615.
177 US Department of Health and Human Services. Mental health:
culture, race, and ethnicity—a supplement to mental health:
a report of the Surgeon General. Rockville, MD: US Department of
Health and Human Services, 2001.
178 Bass JK, Haroz EE, Sartorius N. Global mental health issues:
culture and psychopathology. In: Eaton WW, Fallin MD, eds. Public
mental health, 2nd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press
2019: 53–70.
179 Patel V. The right to mental health. Lancet 2023; 402: 1412–13.
180 Wilkinson R, Pickett K. The spirit level: why more equal societies
almost always do better. London: Penguin, 2009.
181 Kirkbride JB, Anglin DM, Colman I, et al. The social determinants
of mental health and disorder: evidence, prevention and
recommendations. World Psychiatry 2024; 23: 58–90.
182 Bessant J. Young precariat and a new work order? A case for
historical sociology. J Youth Stud 2018; 21: 780–98.
183 Bessant J, Farthing R, Watts R. The precarious generation:
a political economy of young people. New York, NY: Routledge, 2017
184 Gariépy G, Danna SM, Hawke L, Henderson J, Iyer SN. The mental
health of young people who are not in education, employment,
or training: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 2022; 57: 1107–21.
185 Steare T, Gutiérrez Muñoz C, Sullivan A, Lewis G. The association
between academic pressure and adolescent mental health problems:
a systematic review. J Affect Disord 2023; 339: 302–17.
186 Hutchings M. Exam factories? The impact of accountability
measures on children and young people. National Union of
Teachers, 2015.

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

187 Hickman C, Marks E, Pihkala P, et al. Climate anxiety in children and
young people and their beliefs about government responses to
climate change: a global survey. Lancet Planet Health 2021; 5: e863–73.
188 Fava N, Gao CX, Baker D. Climate of distress: responding to the
youth mental health impacts of climate change. Melbourne, VIC:
Orygen, 2023.
189 Orben A, Przybylski AK, Blakemore S-J, Kievit RA. Windows of
developmental sensitivity to social media. Nat Commun 2022;
13: 1649.
190 Achterberg M, Becht A, van der Cruijsen R, et al. Longitudinal
associations between social media use, mental well-being and
structural brain development across adolescence. Dev Cogn Neurosci
2022; 54: 101088.
191 Orben A, Blakemore SJ. How social media affects teen mental
health: a missing link. Nature 2023; 614: 410–12.
192 Silver L. Smartphone ownership is growing rapidly around the
world, but not always equally. Pew Research Center, Feb 5, 2019.
https://www.pewresearch.org/global/2019/02/05/smartphoneownership-is-growing-rapidly-around-the-world-but-not-alwaysequally/ (accessed Nov 23, 2023).
193 Twenge JM, Haidt J, Lozano J, Cummins KM. Specification
curve analysis shows that social media use is linked to poor mental
health, especially among girls. Acta Psychol 2022; 224: 103512.
194 Varoufakis Y. Technofeudalism: what killed capitalism. London:
Penguin, 2023.
195 Borsboom D. A network theory of mental disorders.
World Psychiatry 2017; 16: 5–13.
196 McGorry P. Early clinical phenotypes and risk for serious mental
disorders in young people: need for care precedes traditional
diagnoses in mood and psychotic disorders. Can J Psychiatry 2013;
58: 19–21.
197 McGorry P, Nelson B. Why we need a transdiagnostic staging
approach to emerging psychopathology, early diagnosis, and
treatment. JAMA Psychiatry 2016; 73: 191–92.
198 McGorry PD, Hartmann JA, Spooner R, Nelson B. Beyond the “at
risk mental state” concept: transitioning to transdiagnostic
psychiatry. World Psychiatry 2018; 17: 133–42.
199 Iorfino F, Scott EM, Carpenter JS, et al. Clinical stage transitions in
persons aged 12 to 25 years presenting to early intervention mental
health services with anxiety, mood, and psychotic disorders.
JAMA Psychiatry 2019; 76: 1167–75.
200 Shah JL, Scott J, McGorry PD, et al. Transdiagnostic clinical staging
in youth mental health: a first international consensus statement.
World Psychiatry 2020; 19: 233–42.
201 McGorry P, van Os J. Redeeming diagnosis in psychiatry: timing
versus specificity. Lancet 2013; 381: 343–45.
202 McGorry PD, Hickie IB, eds. Clinical staging in psychiatry: making
diagnosis work for research and treatment. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2019.
203 McGorry PD, Hickie IB, Yung AR, Pantelis C, Jackson HJ. Clinical
staging of psychiatric disorders: a heuristic framework for choosing
earlier, safer and more effective interventions. Aust N Z J Psychiatry
2006; 40: 616–22.
204 Hickie IB, Scott EM, Hermens DF, et al. Applying clinical staging to
young people who present for mental health care.
Early Interv Psychiatry 2013; 7: 31–43.
205 Shah JL. Bringing clinical staging to youth mental health: from
concept to operationalization (and back again). JAMA Psychiatry
2019; 76: 1121–23.
206 McGorry PD, Mei C. Clinical staging for youth mental disorders:
progress in reforming diagnosis and clinical care.
Annu Rev Dev Psychol 2021; 3: 15–39.
207 Porter ME, Lee TH. The strategy that will fix health care.
Harv Bus Rev 2013; 91: 50–70.
208 Rickwood D, Paraskakis M, Quin D, et al. Australia’s innovation in
youth mental health care: the headspace centre model.
Early Interv Psychiatry 2019; 13: 159–66.
209 McGorry PD, Mei C, Chanen A, Hodges C, Alvarez-Jimenez M,
Killackey E. Designing and scaling up integrated youth mental
health care. World Psychiatry 2022; 21: 61–76.
210 Patel V, Saxena S, Lund C, et al. The Lancet Commission on global
mental health and sustainable development. Lancet 2018;
392: 1553–98.

211 Knapp M, Wong G. Economics and mental health: the current
scenario. World Psychiatry 2020; 19: 3–14.
212 Pincus HA, Scholle SH, Spaeth-Rublee B, Hepner KA, Brown J.
Quality measures for mental health and substance use: gaps,
opportunities, and challenges. Health Aff 2016; 35: 1000–08.
213 Firth J, Siddiqi N, Koyanagi A, et al. The Lancet Psychiatry
Commission: a blueprint for protecting physical health in people
with mental illness. Lancet Psychiatry 2019; 6: 675–712.
214 Evans E, Hawton K, Rodham K. Factors associated with suicidal
phenomena in adolescents: a systematic review of population-based
studies. Clin Psychol Rev 2004; 24: 957–79.
215 Thornicroft G. Physical health disparities and mental illness:
the scandal of premature mortality. Br J Psychiatry 2011;
199: 441–42.
216 Brigham A. The moral treatment of insanity (1847). Am J Psychiatry
1994; 151 (Sesquicentennial suppl): 10–15.
217 Shorter E. A history of psychiatry: from the era of the asylum to the
age of Prozac. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 1997.
218 Scull A. Madness in civilization: a cultural history of insanity, from
the bible to Freud, from the madhouse to modern medicine.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015.
219 Byrne SJ, Bellairs-Walsh I, Rice SM, et al. A qualitative account of
young people’s experiences seeking care from emergency
departments for self-harm. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2021;
18: 2892.
220 Hiscock H, Neely RJ, Lei S, Freed G. Paediatric mental and physical
health presentations to emergency departments, Victoria, 2008-15.
Med J Aust 2018; 208: 343–48.
221 Signorini G, Singh SP, Boricevic-Marsanic V, et al. Architecture and
functioning of child and adolescent mental health services:
a 28-country survey in Europe. Lancet Psychiatry 2017; 4: 715–24.
222 Anderson JK, Newlove-Delgado T, Ford TJ. Annual research review:
a systematic review of mental health services for emerging adults moulding a precipice into a smooth passage.
J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2022; 63: 447–62.
223 Singh SP, Paul M, Ford T, et al. Process, outcome and experience of
transition from child to adult mental healthcare: multiperspective
study. Br J Psychiatry 2010; 197: 305–12.
224 Paul M, Ford T, Kramer T, Islam Z, Harley K, Singh SP. Transfers
and transitions between child and adult mental health services.
Br J Psychiatry Suppl 2013; 54: s36–40.
225 Gerritsen SE, van Bodegom LS, Overbeek MM, et al. Leaving child
and adolescent mental health services in the MILESTONE cohort:
a longitudinal cohort study on young people’s mental health
indicators, care pathways, and outcomes in Europe.
Lancet Psychiatry 2022; 9: 944–56.
226 Leijdesdorff S, Postma MR, van Kersbergen L, Marchetta N,
van Amelsvoort T. No boundaries: a 2 year experience in a
specialized youth mental health care program in the Netherlands.
Early Interv Psychiatry 2020; 14: 228–34.
227 McGorry PD. The specialist youth mental health model:
strengthening the weakest link in the public mental health system.
Med J Aust 2007; 187: S53–56.
228 Salaheddin K, Mason B. Identifying barriers to mental health helpseeking among young adults in the UK: a cross-sectional survey.
Br J Gen Pract 2016; 66: e686–92.
229 Whiteford HA, Buckingham WJ, Harris MG, et al. Estimating
treatment rates for mental disorders in Australia. Aust Health Rev
2014; 38: 80–85.
230 headspace. Increasing demand in youth mental health: a rising tide
of need. April, 2019. https://headspace.org.au/assets/Uploads/
Increasing-demand-in-youth-mentalh-a-rising-tide-of-need.pdf
(accessed Nov 23, 2023).
231 YoungMinds. Mental health waiting times harming young people.
2022. https://www.youngminds.org.uk/about-us/media-centre/
press-releases/mental-health-waiting-times-harming-young-people/
(accessed Nov 23, 2023).
232 McGorry PD. Early intervention in psychosis: obvious, effective,
overdue. J Nerv Ment Dis 2015; 203: 310–18.
233 Seidler ZE, Rice SM, Dhillon HM, et al. Patterns of youth mental
health service use and discontinuation: population data from
Australia’s headspace model of care. Psychiatr Serv 2020;
71: 1104–13.

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

767

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

234 Alvarez-Jimenez M, Priede A, Hetrick SE, et al. Risk factors for
relapse following treatment for first episode psychosis: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. Schizophr Res
2012; 139: 116–28.
235 Kennard BD, Emslie GJ, Mayes TL, Hughes JL. Relapse and
recurrence in pediatric depression.
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am 2006; 15: 1057–79, xi.
236 State of Victoria. Royal Commission into Victoria’s Mental Health
System - final report. March 2, 2021. https://www.vic.gov.au/royalcommission-victorias-mental-health-system-final-report (accessed
March 3, 2024).
237 Bickman L. Improving mental health services: a 50-year journey
from randomized experiments to artificial intelligence and
precision mental health. Adm Policy Ment Health 2020; 47: 795–843.
238 Babatunde GB, van Rensburg AJ, Bhana A, Petersen I. Barriers and
facilitators to child and adolescent mental health services in lowand-middle-income countries: a scoping review. Glob Soc Welf 2021;
8: 29–46.
239 UN. Sustainable development goals: youth. https://www.un.org/
sustainabledevelopment/youth/ (accessed Nov 23, 2023).
240 Rosling H, Rosling O, Rosling Rönnlund A. Factfulness: ten
reasons we’re wrong about the world – and why things are better
than you think. London: Sceptre, 2018.
241 van Zyl C, Badenhorst M, Hanekom S, Heine M. Unravelling ‘lowresource settings’: a systematic scoping review with qualitative
content analysis. BMJ Glob Health 2021; 6: 6.
242 Kochhar R. Are you in the global middle class? Find out with our
income calculator. July 21, 2021. https://www.pewresearch.org/
short-reads/2021/07/21/are-you-in-the-global-middle-class-find-outwith-our-income-calculator/ (accessed Jan 17, 2024).
243 Correll CU, Galling B, Pawar A, et al. Comparison of early
intervention services vs treatment as usual for early-phase
psychosis: a systematic review, meta-analysis, and meta-regression.
JAMA Psychiatry 2018; 75: 555–65.
244 Malla A, Iyer S, McGorry P, et al. From early intervention in
psychosis to youth mental health reform: a review of the evolution
and transformation of mental health services for young people.
Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 2016; 51: 319–26.
245 Hegelstad WT, Larsen TK, Auestad B, et al. Long-term follow-up of
the TIPS early detection in psychosis study: effects on 10-year
outcome. Am J Psychiatry 2012; 169: 374–80.
246 Kane JM, Robinson DG, Schooler NR, et al. Comprehensive versus
usual community care for first-episode psychosis: 2-year outcomes
from the NIMH RAISE early treatment program. Am J Psychiatry
2016; 173: 362–72.
247 Chan SKW, Chan SWY, Pang HH, et al. Association of an early
intervention service for psychosis with suicide rate among patients
with first-episode schizophrenia-spectrum disorders.
JAMA Psychiatry 2018; 75: 458–64.
248 McGorry PD, Yung AR, Phillips LJ, et al. Randomized controlled
trial of interventions designed to reduce the risk of progression to
first-episode psychosis in a clinical sample with subthreshold
symptoms. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2002; 59: 921–28.
249 Hansen HG, Starzer M, Nilsson SF, Hjorthøj C, Albert N,
Nordentoft M. Clinical recovery and long-term association of
specialized early intervention services vs treatment as usual among
individuals with first-episode schizophrenia spectrum disorder:
20-year follow-up of the OPUS Trial. JAMA Psychiatry 2023;
80: 371–79.
250 Hetrick SE, Bailey AP, Smith KE, et al. Integrated (one-stop shop)
youth health care: best available evidence and future directions.
Med J Aust 2017; 207: S5–18.
251 McGorry PD, Goldstone SD, Parker AG, Rickwood DJ, Hickie IB.
Cultures for mental health care of young people: an Australian
blueprint for reform. Lancet Psychiatry 2014; 1: 559–68.
252 Funk M, Ivbijaro G. Integrating mental health into primary care:
a global perspective. Geneva: World Health Organization and
World Organization of National Colleges, Academies and
Academic Associations of General Practitioners/Family
Physicians, 2008.
253 Shah JL, Jones N, van Os J, McGorry PD, Gülöksüz S. Early
intervention service systems for youth mental health: integrating
pluripotentiality, clinical staging, and transdiagnostic lessons from
early psychosis. Lancet Psychiatry 2022; 9: 413–22.

768

254 Alvarez-Jimenez M, Koval P, Schmaal L, et al. The Horyzons
project: a randomized controlled trial of a novel online social
therapy to maintain treatment effects from specialist first-episode
psychosis services. World Psychiatry 2021; 20: 233–43.
255 Alvarez-Jimenez M, Rice S, D’Alfonso S, et al. A novel multimodal
digital service (moderated online social therapy+) for help-seeking
young people experiencing mental ill-health: pilot evaluation within
a national youth e-mental health service. J Med Internet Res 2020;
22: e17155.
256 Barry MM, Clarke AM, Jenkins R, Patel V. A systematic review of
the effectiveness of mental health promotion interventions for
young people in low and middle income countries.
BMC Public Health 2013; 13: 835.
257 Morgan AJ, Ross AM, Yap MBH, et al. What works for mental
health problems in youth? Survey of real-world experiences of
treatments and side effects. Early Interv Psychiatry 2021;
15: 1502–12.
258 Wright A, McGorry PD, Harris MG, Jorm AF, Pennell K.
Development and evaluation of a youth mental health community
awareness campaign - The Compass Strategy. BMC Public Health
2006; 6: 215.
259 Ng SH, Tan NJH, Luo Y, Goh WS, Ho R, Ho CSH. A systematic
review of youth and teen Mental Health First Aid: improving
adolescent mental health. J Adolesc Health 2021; 69: 199–210.
260 Morgan AJ, Fischer J-AA, Hart LM, et al. Does Mental Health First
Aid training improve the mental health of aid recipients? The
training for parents of teenagers randomised controlled trial.
BMC Psychiatry 2019; 19: 99.
261 La Sala L, Teh Z, Lamblin M, et al. Can a social media intervention
improve online communication about suicide? A feasibility study
examining the acceptability and potential impact of the #chatsafe
campaign. PLoS One 2021; 16: e0253278.
262 West P, Sweeting H. Fifteen, female and stressed: changing
patterns of psychological distress over time.
J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2003; 44: 399–411.
263 Lager AC, Bremberg SG. Association between labour market trends
and trends in young people’s mental health in ten European
countries 1983-2005. BMC Public Health 2009; 9: 325.
264 Langton EG, Collishaw S, Goodman R, Pickles A, Maughan B.
An emerging income differential for adolescent emotional
problems. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2011; 52: 1081–88.
265 Schepman K, Collishaw S, Gardner F, Maughan B, Scott J,
Pickles A. Do changes in parent mental health explain trends in
youth emotional problems? Soc Sci Med 2011; 73: 293–300.
266 Cuijpers P. Universal prevention of depression at schools: dead
end or challenging crossroad? Evid Based Ment Health 2022;
25: 96–98.
267 Lindstrom G, Sofija E, Riley T. “Getting better at getting better”:
how sharing mental health stories can shape young people’s
wellbeing. Community Ment Health J 2021; 57: 1604–13.
268 Orygen. A global youth mental health advocacy toolkit: a resource to
drive action to address youth mental health. Melbourne, VIC:
Orygen, 2020.
269 Gonsalves PP, Hodgson ES, Michelson D, et al. What are
young Indians saying about mental health? A content analysis
of blogs on the It’s Ok To Talk website. BMJ Open 2019; 9: e028244.
270 McGorry P. Building the momentum and blueprint for reform in
youth mental health. Lancet Psychiatry 2019; 6: 459–61.
271 Arango C, Díaz-Caneja CM, McGorry PD, et al. Preventive
strategies for mental health. Lancet Psychiatry 2018; 5: 591–604.
272 Ormel J, Cuijpers P, Jorm A, Schoevers RA. What is needed to
eradicate the depression epidemic, and why. Ment Health Prev 2020;
17: 200177.
273 Ananthapavan J, Moodie M, Milat A, Veerman L, Whittaker E,
Carter R. A cost-benefit analysis framework for preventive health
interventions to aid decision-making in Australian governments.
Health Res Policy Syst 2021; 19: 147.
274 McGorry PD, Nelson B, Wood SJ, Shah JL, Malla A, Yung A.
Transcending false dichotomies and diagnostic silos to reduce
disease burden in mental disorders.
Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 2020; 55: 1095–103.
275 Cuijpers P, Smit F, Furukawa TA. Most at-risk individuals will not
develop a mental disorder: the limited predictive strength of risk
factors. World Psychiatry 2021; 20: 224–25.

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

276 Fusar-Poli P, Correll CU, Arango C, Berk M, Patel V, Ioannidis JPA.
Preventive psychiatry: a blueprint for improving the mental health
of young people. World Psychiatry 2021; 20: 200–21.
277 Salazar de Pablo G, De Micheli A, Solmi M, et al. Universal and
selective interventions to prevent poor mental health outcomes in
young people: systematic review and meta-analysis.
Harv Rev Psychiatry 2021; 29: 196–215.
278 Stice E, Onipede ZA, Marti CN. A meta-analytic review of trials that
tested whether eating disorder prevention programs prevent eating
disorder onset. Clin Psychol Rev 2021; 87: 102046.
279 Devoe DJ, Farris MS, Townes P, Addington J. Interventions and
transition in youth at risk of psychosis: a systematic review and
meta-analyses. J Clin Psychiatry 2020; 81: 17r12053.
280 Mei C, van der Gaag M, Nelson B, et al. Preventive interventions for
individuals at ultra high risk for psychosis: an updated and
extended meta-analysis. Clin Psychol Rev 2021; 86: 102005.
281 Davies C, Cipriani A, Ioannidis JPA, et al. Lack of evidence to favor
specific preventive interventions in psychosis: a network metaanalysis. World Psychiatry 2018; 17: 196–209.
282 Nelson B, Amminger GP, McGorry PD. Recent meta-analyses in
the clinical high risk for psychosis population: clinical
interpretation of findings and suggestions for future research.
Front Psychiatry 2018; 9: 502.
283 McGorry PD, Mei C, Amminger GP, et al. A sequential adaptive
intervention strategy targeting remission and functional recovery in
young people at ultrahigh risk of psychosis: the staged treatment in
early psychosis (STEP) sequential multiple assignment randomized
trial. JAMA Psychiatry 2023; 80: 875–85.
284 Hawke LD, Thabane L, Iyer SN, Jaouich A, Reaume-Zimmer P,
Henderson J. Service providers endorse integrated services model
for youth with mental health and substance use challenges:
findings from a discrete choice experiment. BMC Health Serv Res
2021; 21: 1035.
285 Henderson J, Hawke LD, Iyer SN, et al. Youth perspectives on
integrated youth services: a discrete choice conjoint experiment.
Can J Psychiatry 2022; 67: 524–33.
286 Settipani CA, Hawke LD, Cleverley K, et al. Key attributes of
integrated community-based youth service hubs for mental health:
a scoping review. Int J Ment Health Syst 2019; 13: 52.
287 Lederman R, Wadley G, Gleeson J, Bendall S, Álvarez-Jiménez M.
Moderated online social therapy: designing and evaluating
technology for mental health. ACM Trans Comput Hum Interact
2014; 21: 1–26.
288 KPMG. Evaluation of the national headspace program. June, 2022.
https://www.health.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/2022/10/
evaluation-of-the-national-headspace-program.pdf (accessed
Nov 23, 2023).
289 Illback RJ, Bates T, Hodges C, et al. Jigsaw: engaging communities
in the development and implementation of youth mental health
services and supports in the Republic of Ireland. J Ment Health
2010; 19: 422–35.
290 Henderson JL, Chiodo D, Varatharasan N, Andari S, Luce J, Wolfe J.
Youth Wellness Hubs Ontario: development and initial
implementation of integrated youth services in Ontario, Canada.
Early Interv Psychiatry 2023; 17: 107–14.
291 Malla A, Iyer S, Shah J, et al. Canadian response to need for
transformation of youth mental health services: ACCESS Open
Minds (Esprits ouverts). Early Interv Psychiatry 2019; 13: 697–706.
292 Mathias S, Tee K, Helfrich W, Gerty K, Chan G, Barbic SP.
Foundry: early learnings from the implementation of an
integrated youth service network. Early Interv Psychiatry 2022;
16: 410–18.
293 Birchwood MJ, Street C, Singh SP, et al. Impact and process
evaluation of Forward Thinking Birmingham, the 0-25 mental
health service: final report. University of Warwick, University of
Birmingham, Great Involvement Future Thinking, and
CLAHRC-WM, 2018.
294 Wilson J, Clarke T, Lower R, et al. Creating an innovative youth
mental health service in the United Kingdom: The Norfolk Youth
Service. Early Interv Psychiatry 2018; 12: 740–46.
295 Harish SS, Kundadak GK, Lee YP, Tang C, Verma SK. A decade of
influence in the Singapore youth mental health landscape:
the Community Health Assessment Team (CHAT). Singapore Med J
2021; 62: 225–29.

296 Leijdesdorff SMJ, Rosema S, Klaassen RMC, Popma A,
van Amelsvoort T. Who is @ease? Visitors’ characteristics and
working method of professionally supported peer-to-peer youth
walk-in centres, anonymous and free of charge.
Early Interv Psychiatry 2022; 16: 1391–97.
297 Uchino T, Kotsuji Y, Kitano T, et al. An integrated youth mental
health service in a densely populated metropolitan area in Japan:
clinical case management bridges the gap between mental health
and illness services. Early Interv Psychiatry 2022; 16: 568–75.
298 Kim S-W, Kim J-K, Jhon M, et al. Mindlink: A stigma-free youthfriendly community-based early-intervention centre in Korea.
Early Interv Psychiatry 2021; 15: 1389–94.
299 Hoter-Ishay G, Mashiach-Eizenberg M, Roe D. Young help-seeker
profiles in Israel: the case of the first Israeli headspace centre.
Early Interv Psychiatry 2022; 16: 302–10.
300 Hui CLM, Suen Y-N, Lam BYH, et al. LevelMind@JC: development
and evaluation of a community early intervention program for
young people in Hong Kong. Early Interv Psychiatry 2022;
16: 920–25.
301 Benoit L, Cottin P, Moro MR. What is a “Maison des Adolescents”?
A history of integrated youth health care services in France.
Early Interv Psychiatry 2018; 12: 1000–05.
302 Communio. Evaluation of Youth One Stop Shops: final report
version 1.1. Wellington: New Zealand Ministry of Health, 2009.
303 Helfrich W, Tee K, Henderson J, Barbic S, Mathias S. Towards
consensus standards for integrated youth services initiatives in
Canada. September, 2022. https://foundrybc.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2023/01/Towards-Consensus-Standards-for-IntegratedYouth-Services-Initiatives-in-Canada.pdf (accessed July 16, 2024).
304 Hawke LD, Mehra K, Settipani C, et al. What makes mental health
and substance use services youth friendly? A scoping review of
literature. BMC Health Serv Res 2019; 19: 257.
305 Amara F, Naves P. Evaluation de la mise en place du dispositif
“maison des adolescents” (MDA). Paris: Membres de I’Inspection
Generale des Affaires Sociales, 2013 [in French].
306 Hilferty F, Cassells R, Muir K, et al. Is headspace making a
difference to young people’s lives? Final report of the independent
evaluation of the headspace program. Sydney, NSW: University of
New South Wales, 2015.
307 headspace. Our contribution to the mental health and wellbeing of
young people in Australia. Melbourne, VIC: headspace National
Youth Mental Health Foundation, 2021.
308 Rickwood DJ, Mazzer KR, Telford NR, Parker AG, Tanti CJ,
McGorry PD. Changes in psychological distress and psychosocial
functioning in young people visiting headspace centres for mental
health problems. Med J Aust 2015; 202: 537–42.
309 O’Reilly A, Illback R, Peiper N, O’Keeffe L, Clayton R. Youth
engagement with an emerging Irish mental health early
intervention programme (Jigsaw): participant characteristics
and implications for service delivery. J Ment Health 2015;
24: 283–88.
310 Community Consultants. Independent evaluation of Jigsaw service
model 2018. October, 2018. https://jigsaw.ie/wp-content/
uploads/2020/07/Jigsaw-HSE-evaluation-report-2018.pdf (accessed
April 5, 2024).
311 O’Keeffe L, O’Reilly A, O’Brien G, Buckley R, Illback R. Description
and outcome evaluation of Jigsaw: an emergent Irish mental health
early intervention programme for young people. Ir J Psychol Med
2015; 32: 71–77.
312 Lee YP, Ngaiman NKB, Poon LY, et al. Evaluating Singapore’s
CHAT assessment service by the World Mental Health Organisation
(WHO) “youth-friendly” health services framework. Front Psychiatry
2019; 10: 422.
313 Open Minds ACCESS. Impact of ACCESS Open Minds: early
results. Aug 31, 2020. https://accessopenminds.ca/impact/
(accessed Nov 23, 2023).
314 Ishay GH, Zisman-Ilani Y, Roe D. A longitudinal study of
headspace youth oriented mental health service satisfaction, service
utilization and clinical characteristics. Early Interv Psychiatry 2023;
17: 404–11.
315 Government du Quebec. Aire ouverte: services for young people
aged 12 to 25. 2024. https://www.quebec.ca/en/health/finding-aresource/aire-ouverte-services-for-young-people-aged-12-to-25
(accessed July 3, 2024).

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

769

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

316 Dowell A, Stubbe M, Gordon S, et al. Evaluation of the Piki Pilot
Project (January 2020 - December 2021) – final report. Wellington:
University of Otago, 2021.
317 The Hong Kong Jockey Club. LevelMind@JC. 2024 https://
charities.hkjc.com/charities/english/community-contributions/
children-youth/levelmind.aspx (accessed July 3, 2024).
318 Stanford Medicine, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences. allcoveTM: where every youth belongs, choose the
support they need and thrives. 2024. https://med.stanford.edu/
psychiatry/special-initiatives/allcove.html (accessed July 3, 2024).
319 Jorm AF. How effective are ‘headspace’ youth mental health
services? Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2015; 49: 861–62.
320 Kisely S, Looi JCL. Latest evidence casts further doubt on the
effectiveness of headspace. Med J Aust 2022; 217: 388–90.
321 Cross SP, Scott JL, Hickie IB. Concerns about the headspace model
of youth mental health services. Psychiatr Serv 2018; 69: 839.
322 Rickwood DJ, Trethowan J, McGorry PD. Latest evidence casts further
doubt on the effectiveness of headspace. Med J Aust 2023; 218: 542.
323 McGorry PD, Hamilton M, Goldstone S, Rickwood DJ. Response to
Jorm: headspace - a national and international innovation with
lessons for redesign of mental health care in Australia.
Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2016; 50: 9–10.
324 Orygen. Defining the missing middle. 2021. https://www.orygen.
org.au/Orygen-Institute/Policy-Areas/Government-policy-servicedelivery-and-workforce/Service-delivery/Defining-the-missingmiddle/orygen-defining-the-missing-middle-pdf?ext (accessed
Nov 23, 2023).
325 Iorfino F, Carpenter JS, Cross SPM, et al. Social and occupational
outcomes for young people who attend early intervention mental
health services: a longitudinal study. Med J Aust 2022; 216: 87–93.
326 Ramaswamy S, Sagar JV, Seshadri S. A transdisciplinary public
health model for child and adolescent mental healthcare in low- and
middle-income countries. Lancet Reg Health Southeast Asia 2022;
3: 100024.
327 National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences. Cumulative
reach and impact: June 2020–September 2023. 2023. https://
nimhanschildprotect.in/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/SAMVADDASHBOARD.pdf (accessed Jan 17, 2024).
328 UNESCO. Mean years of education. https://www.educationinequalities.org/ indicators/eduyears# maxYear= 2021&minYea r=2
016&ageGroup=%22eduyears_2024%22 (accessed Jan 8, 2024).
329 Perry Y, Petrie K, Buckley H, et al. Effects of a classroom-based
educational resource on adolescent mental health literacy: a cluster
randomized controlled trial. J Adolesc 2014; 37: 1143–51.
330 O’Reilly M, Svirydzenka N, Adams S, Dogra N. Review of mental
health promotion interventions in schools.
Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 2018; 53: 647–62.
331 Husky MM, Kaplan A, McGuire L, Flynn L, Chrostowski C,
Olfson M. Identifying adolescents at risk through voluntary schoolbased mental health screening. J Adolesc 2011; 34: 505–11.
332 Williams I, Vaisey A, Patton G, Sanci L. The effectiveness, feasibility
and scalability of the school platform in adolescent mental
healthcare. Curr Opin Psychiatry 2020; 33: 391–96.
333 Werner-Seidler A, Spanos S, Calear AL, et al. School-based
depression and anxiety prevention programs: an updated systematic
review and meta-analysis. Clin Psychol Rev 2021; 89: 102079.
334 Caldwell DM, Davies SR, Hetrick SE, et al. School-based
interventions to prevent anxiety and depression in children and
young people: a systematic review and network meta-analysis.
Lancet Psychiatry 2019; 6: 1011–20.
335 Bonell C, Allen E, Warren E, et al. Effects of the Learning Together
intervention on bullying and aggression in English secondary
schools (INCLUSIVE): a cluster randomised controlled trial. Lancet
2018; 392: 2452–64.
336 Shinde S, Weiss HA, Varghese B, et al. Promoting school climate
and health outcomes with the SEHER multi-component secondary
school intervention in Bihar, India: a cluster-randomised controlled
trial. Lancet 2018; 392: 2465–77.
337 Malik K, Michelson D, Doyle AM, et al. Effectiveness and costs
associated with a lay counselor-delivered, brief problem-solving
mental health intervention for adolescents in urban, low-income
schools in India: 12-month outcomes of a randomized controlled
trial. PLoS Med 2021; 18: e1003778.

770

338 Michelson D, Malik K, Parikh R, et al. Effectiveness of a brief lay
counsellor-delivered, problem-solving intervention for adolescent
mental health problems in urban, low-income schools in India:
a randomised controlled trial. Lancet Child Adolesc Health 2020;
4: 571–82.
339 Parikh R, Hoogendoorn A, Michelson D, et al. Increasing demand
for school counselling through a lay counsellor-delivered classroom
sensitisation intervention: a stepped-wedge cluster randomised
controlled trial in New Delhi, India. BMJ Glob Health 2021;
6: e003902.
340 Gonsalves PP, Bhat B, Sharma R, et al. Pilot randomised controlled
trial of a remotely delivered online intervention for adolescent mental
health problems in India: lessons learned about low acceptability and
feasibility during the COVID-19 pandemic. BJPsych Open 2022; 9: e7.
341 Gonsalves PP, Hodgson ES, Bhat B, et al. App-based guided
problem-solving intervention for adolescent mental health: a pilot
cohort study in Indian schools. Evid Based Ment Health 2021;
24: 11–18.
342 Malik K, Ibrahim M, Mathur S, et al. Development of a
transdiagnostic stepped care programme for common adolescent
mental health problems in Indian secondary schools: lessons from
a pilot study examining acceptability and feasibility.
Glob Ment Health 2022; 9: 521–25.
343 Mathur S, Weiss HA, Neuman M, et al. Coach-supported versus
self-guided digital training course for a problem-solving
psychological intervention for nonspecialists: protocol for a pre-post
nested randomized controlled trial. JMIR Res Protoc 2023;
12: e41981.
344 Worsley JD, Pennington A, Corcoran R. Supporting mental health
and wellbeing of university and college students: a systematic
review of review-level evidence of interventions. PLoS One 2022;
17: e0266725.
345 Duffy A, Saunders KEA, Malhi GS, et al. Mental health care for
university students: a way forward? Lancet Psychiatry 2019;
6: 885–87.
346 Vallianatos H, Friese K, Perez JM, et al. ACCESS Open Minds at the
University of Alberta: transforming student mental health services
in a large Canadian post-secondary educational institution.
Early Interv Psychiatry 2019; 13 (suppl 1): 56–64.
347 Ferrari M, Allan S, Arnold C, et al. Digital interventions for
psychological well-being in university students: systematic review
and meta-analysis. J Med Internet Res 2022; 24: e39686.
348 Prensky M. Digital natives, digital immigrants part 1. On Horiz
2001; 9: 1–6.
349 Firth J, Torous J, Stubbs B, et al. The “online brain”: how the
internet may be changing our cognition. World Psychiatry 2019;
18: 119–29.
350 Vogels EA, Gelles-Watnick R, Massarat N. Teens, social media and
technology 2022. Pew Research Center, Aug 10, 2022. https://www.
pewresearch.org/internet/2022/08/10/teens-social-media-andtechnology-2022/ (accessed July 3, 2024).
351 Torous J, Myrick K, Aguilera A. The need for a new generation of
digital mental health tools to support more accessible, effective and
equitable care. World Psychiatry 2023; 22: 1–2.
352 Madonsela S, Ware LJ, Scott M, Watermeyer J. The development
and use of adolescent mobile mental health (m-mhealth)
interventions in low- and middle-income countries: a scoping
review. S Afr J Psychol 2023; 53: 471–83.
353 Wang D, Shinde S, Drysdale R, et al. Access to digital media and
devices among adolescents in sub-Saharan Africa: a multicountry,
school-based survey. Matern Child Nutr 2023; published online
April 4. https://doi.org/10.1111/mcn.13462.
354 La Sala L, Pirkis J, Cooper C, et al. Acceptability and potential
impact of the #chatsafe suicide postvention response among young
people who have been exposed to suicide: pilot study.
JMIR Hum Factors 2023; 10: e44535.
355 Robinson J, Hill NTM, Thorn P, et al. The #chatsafe project.
Developing guidelines to help young people communicate safely
about suicide on social media: a Delphi study. PLoS One 2018;
13: e0206584.
356 Deady M, Mills KL, Teesson M, Kay-Lambkin F. An online
intervention for co-occurring depression and problematic alcohol
use in young people: primary outcomes from a randomized
controlled trial. J Med Internet Res 2016; 18: e71.

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

357 Andersson G, Titov N, Dear BF, Rozental A, Carlbring P. Internetdelivered psychological treatments: from innovation to
implementation. World Psychiatry 2019; 18: 20–28.
358 Carlbring P, Andersson G, Cuijpers P, Riper H,
Hedman-Lagerlöf E. Internet-based vs. face-to-face cognitive
behavior therapy for psychiatric and somatic disorders: an updated
systematic review and meta-analysis. Cogn Behav Ther 2018;
47: 1–18.
359 Cross SP, Karin E, Staples LG, et al. Factors associated with
treatment uptake, completion, and subsequent symptom
improvement in a national digital mental health service.
Internet Interv 2022; 27: 100506.
360 Etzelmueller A, Vis C, Karyotaki E, et al. Effects of internet-based
cognitive behavioural therapy in routine care for adults in treatment
for depression and anxiety: systematic review and meta-analysis.
J Med Internet Res 2020; 22: e18100.
361 Bell IH, Thompson A, Valentine L, Adams S, Alvarez-Jimenez M,
Nicholas J. Ownership, use of, and interest in digital mental health
technologies among clinicians and young people across a spectrum
of clinical care needs: cross-sectional survey. JMIR Ment Health
2022; 9: e30716.
362 Valentine L, McEnery C, Bell I, et al. Blended digital and face-to-face
care for first-episode psychosis treatment in young people:
qualitative study. JMIR Ment Health 2020; 7: e18990.
363 Parliament of Australia. Mental health and suicide prevention - final
report. Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia, 2021.
364 Mohr DC, Riper H, Schueller SM. A solution-focused research
approach to achieve an implementable revolution in digital mental
health. JAMA Psychiatry 2018; 75: 113–14.
365 Mohr DC, Weingardt KR, Reddy M, Schueller SM. Three problems
with current digital mental health research ... and three things we
can do about them. Psychiatr Serv 2017; 68: 427–29.
366 Bear HA, Ayala Nunes L, DeJesus J, et al. Determination of
markers of successful implementation of mental health apps for
young people: systematic review. J Med Internet Res 2022;
24: e40347.
367 Graham AK, Lattie EG, Powell BJ, et al. Implementation strategies
for digital mental health interventions in health care settings.
Am Psychol 2020; 75: 1080–92.
368 Alvarez-Jimenez M, Gleeson JF, Bendall S, et al. Enhancing social
functioning in young people at ultra high risk (UHR) for psychosis:
a pilot study of a novel strengths and mindfulness-based online
social therapy. Schizophr Res 2018; 202: 369–77.
369 Engel L, Alvarez-Jimenez M, Cagliarini D, et al. The costeffectiveness of a novel online social therapy to maintain treatment
effects from first-episode psychosis services: results from the
Horyzons randomized controlled trial. Schizophr Bull 2024;
50: 427–36.
370 Rice S, Gleeson J, Davey C, et al. Moderated online social therapy
for depression relapse prevention in young people: pilot study of a
‘next generation’ online intervention. Early Interv Psychiatry 2018;
12: 613–25.
371 Rice S, O’Bree B, Wilson M, et al. Leveraging the social network for
treatment of social anxiety: pilot study of a youth-specific digital
intervention with a focus on engagement of young men.
Internet Interv 2020; 20: 100323.
372 Valentine L, McEnery C, O’Sullivan S, et al. Young people’s
experience of online therapy for first-episode psychosis: a qualitative
study. Psychol Psychother 2022; 95: 155–72.
373 Lal S, Gleeson J, Rivard L, et al. Adaptation of a digital health
innovation to prevent relapse and support recovery in youth
receiving services for first-episode psychosis: results from the
Horyzons-Canada phase 1 study. JMIR Form Res 2020; 4: e19887.
374 Ludwig KA, Browne JW, Nagendra A, et al. Horyzons USA:
a moderated online social intervention for first episode psychosis.
Early Interv Psychiatry 2021; 15: 335–43.
375 van Doorn M, Monsanto A, Wang CL, et al. The effects of a digital,
transdiagnostic, clinically and peer-moderated treatment platform
for young people with emerging mental health complaints: repeated
measures within-subjects study. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2023;
11: e50636.
376 Naslund JA, Aschbrenner KA, Marsch LA, Bartels SJ. The future of
mental health care: peer-to-peer support and social media.
Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci 2016; 25: 113–22.

377 Bailey E, Alvarez-Jimenez M, Robinson J, et al. An enhanced social
networking intervention for young people with active suicidal
ideation: safety, feasibility and acceptability outcomes.
Int J Environ Res Public Health 2020; 17: 17.
378 Bell IH, Nicholas J, Alvarez-Jimenez M, Thompson A, Valmaggia L.
Virtual reality as a clinical tool in mental health research and
practice. Dialogues Clin Neurosci 2020; 22: 169–77.
379 D’Alfonso S, Santesteban-Echarri O, Rice S, et al. Artificial
intelligence-assisted online social therapy for youth mental health.
Front Psychol 2017; 8: 796.
380 Gao CX, McDonald LP, Hamilton MP, et al. Inequalities in access
to mental health treatment by Australian youths during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Psychiatr Serv 2023; 74: 581–88.
381 Wiens K, Bhattarai A, Pedram P, et al. A growing need for youth
mental health services in Canada: examining trends in youth
mental health from 2011 to 2018. Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci 2020;
29: e115.
382 Mojtabai R, Olfson M. National trends in mental health care for US
adolescents. JAMA Psychiatry 2020; 77: 703–14.
383 Australian Government Productivity Commission. Mental health:
Productivity Commission inquiry report volume 1. June 30, 2020.
https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/mental-health/report/
mental-health.pdf (accessed July 3, 2024).
384 Carbone S, Rickwood D, Tanti C. Workforce shortages and their
impact on Australian youth mental health service reform.
Adv Ment Health 2011; 10: 92–97.
385 Hoffmann JA, Attridge MM, Carroll MS, Simon NE, Beck AF,
Alpern ER. Association of youth suicides and county-level mental
health professional shortage areas in the US. JAMA Pediatr 2023;
177: 71–80.
386 Macmillan I, Thompson A, Kalucy M, et al. A certificate in youth
psychiatry: meeting the training needs of psychiatrists.
Australas Psychiatry 2021; 29: 97–100.
387 Hall J, Jordan S, van Ommeren M, et al. Sustainable technology for
adolescents and youth to reduce stress (STARS): a WHO
transdiagnostic chatbot for distressed youth. World Psychiatry 2022;
21: 156–57.
388 Ndetei DM, Mutiso V, Osborn T. Moving away from the scarcity
fallacy: three strategies to reduce the mental health treatment gap in
LMICs. World Psychiatry 2023; 22: 163–64.
389 Singla DR, Kohrt BA, Murray LK, Anand A, Chorpita BF, Patel V.
Psychological treatments for the world: lessons from low- and
middle-income countries. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2017; 13: 149–81.
390 Chibanda D, Weiss HA, Verhey R, et al. Effect of a primary care–
based psychological intervention on symptoms of common mental
disorders in Zimbabwe: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2016;
316: 2618–26.
391 Gopalan G, Lee SJ, Harris R, Acri MC, Munson MR. Utilization of
peers in services for youth with emotional and behavioral
challenges: a scoping review. J Adolesc 2017; 55: 88–115.
392 de Beer CRM, Nooteboom LA, van Domburgh L, de Vreugd M,
Schoones JW, Vermeiren RRJM. A systematic review exploring
youth peer support for young people with mental health problems.
Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2022; published online Dec 10. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00787-022-02120-5.
393 Simmons MB, Batchelor S, Dimopoulos-Bick T, Howe D. The
Choice Project: peer workers promoting shared decision making at
a youth mental health service. Psychiatr Serv 2017; 68: 764–70.
394 Mazzucato M. Mission economy: a moonshot guide to changing
capitalism. London: Allen Lane, 2023.
395 Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. Global Burden of
Disease Seattle: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation,
University of Washington, 2022. https://www.healthdata.org/
research-analysis/gbd (accessed July 3, 2024).
396 Knapp M, Andrew A, McDaid D, et al. Investing in recovery:
making the business case for effective interventions for people with
schizophrenia and psychosis. London: Rethink Mental Illness, 2014.
397 Bloom DE, Cafiero ET, Jané-Llopis E, et al. The global economic
burden of non-communicable diseases. Geneva: World Economic
Forum, 2011.
398 Canals J, Domènech-Llaberia E, Fernández-Ballart J,
Martí-Henneberg C. Predictors of depression at eighteen. A 7-year
follow-up study in a Spanish nonclinical population.
Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2002; 11: 226–33.

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

771

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

399 Chaiton MO, Cohen JE, O’Loughlin J, Rehm J. A systematic review
of longitudinal studies on the association between depression and
smoking in adolescents. BMC Public Health 2009; 9: 356.
400 Moustafa AF, Testa S, Rodriguez D, Pianin S, Audrain-McGovern J.
Adolescent depression symptoms and e-cigarette progression.
Drug Alcohol Depend 2021; 228: 109072.
401 De Hert M, Detraux J, Vancampfort D. The intriguing relationship
between coronary heart disease and mental disorders.
Dialogues Clin Neurosci 2018; 20: 31–40.
402 Pan A, Sun Q, Okereke OI, Rexrode KM, Hu FB. Depression and
risk of stroke morbidity and mortality: a meta-analysis and
systematic review. JAMA 2011; 306: 1241–49.
403 Perez M, Ohrt TK, Bruening AB. The effects of different
recruitment and incentive strategies for body acceptance programs
on college women. Eat Disord 2016; 24: 383–92.
404 Nordentoft M, Wahlbeck K, Hällgren J, et al. Excess mortality,
causes of death and life expectancy in 270 770 patients with recent
onset of mental disorders in Denmark, Finland and Sweden.
PLoS One 2013; 8: e55176.
405 Kessler RC. The costs of depression. Psychiatr Clin North Am 2012;
35: 1–14.
406 Philipson A, Alaie I, Ssegonja R, et al. Adolescent depression and
subsequent earnings across early to middle adulthood: a 25-year
longitudinal cohort study. Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci 2020; 29: e123.
407 Mihalopoulos C, Vos T, Rapee RM, et al. The population costeffectiveness of a parenting intervention designed to prevent anxiety
disorders in children. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2015; 56: 1026–33.
408 Simon E, Dirksen CD, Bögels SM. An explorative cost-effectiveness
analysis of school-based screening for child anxiety using a decision
analytic model. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2013; 22: 619–30.
409 Lee YY, Barendregt JJ, Stockings EA, et al. The population costeffectiveness of delivering universal and indicated school-based
interventions to prevent the onset of major depression among
youth in Australia. Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci 2017; 26: 545–64.
410 Anderson R, Ukoumunne OC, Sayal K, et al. Cost-effectiveness of
classroom-based cognitive behaviour therapy in reducing symptoms
of depression in adolescents: a trial-based analysis.
J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2014; 55: 1390–97.
411 Stallard P, Phillips R, Montgomery AA, et al. A cluster randomised
controlled trial to determine the clinical effectiveness and costeffectiveness of classroom-based cognitive-behavioural therapy
(CBT) in reducing symptoms of depression in high-risk
adolescents. Health Technol Assess 2013; 17: vii–xvii, 1–109.
412 Le LK-D, Barendregt JJ, Hay P, Sawyer SM, Paxton SJ,
Mihalopoulos C. The modelled cost-effectiveness of cognitive
dissonance for the prevention of anorexia nervosa and bulimia
nervosa in adolescent girls in Australia. Int J Eat Disord 2017;
50: 834–41.
413 McDaid D, Park A-L, Knapp M, Wilson E, Rosen B, Beecham J.
Commissioning cost-effective services for promotion of mental
health and wellbeing and prevention of mental ill-health. London:
Public Health England, 2017.
414 Mihalopoulos C, Le LK-D, Engel L, Lal A, Lee YY, Bucholc J.
The economic case for investing in mental health prevention.
National Mental Health Commission, 2019. https://www.
mentalhealthcommission.gov.au/search/funnelback?query=The+eco
nomic+case+for+investing+in+mental+health+ prevention.+National
+Mental+Health+Commission%2C+2019.+&search_scope=0
(accessed July 3, 2024).
415 Aceituno D, Vera N, Prina AM, McCrone P. Cost-effectiveness of
early intervention in psychosis: systematic review. Br J Psychiatry
2019; 215: 388–94.
416 Ologundudu OM, Lau T, Palaniyappan L, Ali S, Anderson KK.
Interventions for people at ultra-high risk for psychosis:
a systematic review of economic evaluations. Early Interv Psychiatry
2021; 15: 1115–26.
417 Shields GE, Buck D, Varese F, et al. A review of economic
evaluations of health care for people at risk of psychosis and for
first-episode psychosis. BMC Psychiatry 2022; 22: 126.
418 Hamilton MP, Hetrick SE, Mihalopoulos C, et al. Identifying
attributes of care that may improve cost-effectiveness in the youth
mental health service system. Med J Aust 2017; 207: S27–37.
419 Malla A, Pelosi AJ. Is treating patients with first-episode psychosis
cost-effective? Can J Psychiatry 2010; 55: 3–7, discussion 7–8.

772

420 Groff M, Latimer E, Joober R, et al. Economic evaluation of
extended early intervention service vs regular care following 2 years
of early intervention: secondary analysis of a randomized controlled
trial. Schizophr Bull 2021; 47: 465–73.
421 Wong KK, Chan SK, Lam MM, et al. Cost-effectiveness of an early
assessment service for young people with early psychosis in
Hong Kong. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2011; 45: 673–80.
422 McCrone P, Singh SP, Knapp M, et al. The economic impact of
early intervention in psychosis services for children and
adolescents. Early Interv Psychiatry 2013; 7: 368–73.
423 Park AL, McCrone P, Knapp M. Early intervention for first-episode
psychosis: broadening the scope of economic estimates.
Early Interv Psychiatry 2016; 10: 144–51.
424 Campion J, Knapp M. The economic case for improved coverage of
public mental health interventions. Lancet Psychiatry 2018;
5: 103–05.
425 Tsiachristas A, Thomas T, Leal J, Lennox BR. Economic impact of
early intervention in psychosis services: results from a longitudinal
retrospective controlled study in England. BMJ Open 2016;
6: e012611.
426 Shah JL, Moinfar Z, Anderson KK, et al. Return on investment
from service transformation for young people experiencing mental
health problems: approach to economic evaluations in ACCESS
Open Minds (Esprits ouverts), a multi-site pan-Canadian youth
mental health project. Front Psychiatry 2023; 14: 1030407.
427 Jankovic D, Bojke L, Marshall D, et al. Systematic review and
critique of methods for economic evaluation of digital mental
health interventions. Appl Health Econ Health Policy 2021;
19: 17–27.
428 Le LK-D, Sanci L, Chatterton ML, Kauer S, Buhagiar K,
Mihalopoulos C. The cost-effectiveness of an internet intervention
to facilitate mental health help-seeking by young adults:
randomized controlled trial. J Med Internet Res 2019; 21: e13065.
429 Wright DR, Haaland WL, Ludman E, McCauley E, Lindenbaum J,
Richardson LP. The costs and cost-effectiveness of collaborative
care for adolescents with depression in primary care settings:
a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Pediatr 2016; 170: 1048–54.
430 Le LK-D, Barendregt JJ, Hay P, Sawyer SM, Hughes EK,
Mihalopoulos C. The modeled cost-effectiveness of family-based
and adolescent-focused treatment for anorexia nervosa.
Int J Eat Disord 2017; 50: 1356–66.
431 Turner D, Carter T, Sach T, Guo B, Callaghan P. Cost-effectiveness
of a preferred intensity exercise programme for young people with
depression compared with treatment as usual: an economic
evaluation alongside a clinical trial in the UK. BMJ Open 2017;
7: e016211.
432 Tie H, Krebs G, Lang K, et al. Cost-effectiveness analysis of
telephone cognitive-behaviour therapy for adolescents with
obsessive-compulsive disorder. BJPsych Open 2019; 5: e7.
433 Government Office for Science. Mental capital and wellbeing:
making the most of ourselves in the 21st century: executive
summary. Oct 22, 2008. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
media/5a7ce5afed915d36e95f0526/mental-capital-wellbeingsummary.pdf (accessed May 6, 2024).
434 The World Bank. World development report 2015: mind, society,
and behavior. Washington, DC: The World Bank, 2015.
435 Levin C, Chisholm D. Cost-effectiveness and affordability of
interventions, policies, and platforms for the prevention and
treatment of mental, neurological, and substance use disorders.
In: Patel V, Chisholm D, Dua T, Laxminarayan R, Medina-Mora ME,
eds. Mental, neurological, and substance use disorders: disease
control priorities, 3rd edn. Washington, DC: The World Bank,
2016: 219–36.
436 Kazibwe J, Gheorghe A, Wilson D, Ruiz F, Chalkidou K, Chi YL.
The use of cost-effectiveness thresholds for evaluating health
interventions in low- and middle-income countries from 2015 to
2020: a review. Value Health 2022; 25: 385–89.
437 Maselko J. Social epidemiology and global mental health: expanding
the evidence from high-income to low- and middle-income
countries. Curr Epidemiol Rep 2017; 4: 166–73.
438 Zimmerman A, Garman E, Avendano-Pabon M, et al. The impact of
cash transfers on mental health in children and young people in
low-income and middle-income countries: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. BMJ Glob Health 2021; 6: e004661.

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

439 Kilburn K, Thirumurthy H, Halpern CT, Pettifor A, Handa S. Effects
of a large-scale unconditional cash transfer program on mental health
outcomes of young people in Kenya. J Adolesc Health 2016; 58: 223–29.
440 Tozan Y, Sun S, Capasso A, et al. Evaluation of a savings-led familybased economic empowerment intervention for AIDS-affected
adolescents in Uganda: a four-year follow-up on efficacy and costeffectiveness. PLoS One 2019; 14: e0226809.
441 Machado DB, Williamson E, Pescarini JM, et al. Relationship
between the Bolsa Família national cash transfer programme and
suicide incidence in Brazil: a quasi-experimental study. PLoS Med
2022; 19: e1004000.
442 Chisholm D, Moro D, Bertram M, et al. Are the “best buys” for
alcohol control still valid? An update on the comparative costeffectiveness of alcohol control strategies at the global level.
J Stud Alcohol Drugs 2018; 79: 514–22.
443 Knipe DW, Gunnell D, Eddleston M. Preventing deaths from
pesticide self-poisoning-learning from Sri Lanka’s success.
Lancet Glob Health 2017; 5: e651–52.
444 Chisholm D, Saxena S. Cost effectiveness of strategies to combat
neuropsychiatric conditions in sub-Saharan Africa and South East
Asia: mathematical modelling study. BMJ 2012; 344: e609.
445 Chisholm D, Sweeny K, Sheehan P, et al. Scaling-up treatment of
depression and anxiety: a global return on investment analysis.
Lancet Psychiatry 2016; 3: 415–24.
446 Strand KB, Chisholm D, Fekadu A, Johansson KA. Scaling-up
essential neuropsychiatric services in Ethiopia: a cost-effectiveness
analysis. Health Policy Plan 2016; 31: 504–13.
447 McBain RK, Salhi C, Hann K, Salomon JA, Kim JJ, Betancourt TS.
Costs and cost-effectiveness of a mental health intervention for waraffected young persons: decision analysis based on a randomized
controlled trial. Health Policy Plan 2016; 31: 415–24.
448 Bolton P, West J, Whitney C, et al. Expanding mental health
services in low- and middle-income countries: a task-shifting
framework for delivery of comprehensive, collaborative, and
community-based care. Glob Ment Health 2023; 10: e16.
449 Seidman G, Atun R. Does task shifting yield cost savings and
improve efficiency for health systems? A systematic review of
evidence from low-income and middle-income countries.
Hum Resour Health 2017; 15: 29.
450 Patel V, Weobong B, Weiss HA, et al. The Healthy Activity Program
(HAP), a lay counsellor-delivered brief psychological treatment for
severe depression, in primary care in India: a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet 2017; 389: 176–85.
451 Weobong B, Weiss HA, McDaid D, et al. Sustained effectiveness
and cost-effectiveness of the Healthy Activity Programme, a brief
psychological treatment for depression delivered by lay counsellors
in primary care: 12-month follow-up of a randomised controlled
trial. PLoS Med 2017; 14: e1002385.
452 Nakimuli-Mpungu E, Musisi S, Wamala K, et al. Effectiveness and
cost-effectiveness of group support psychotherapy delivered by
trained lay health workers for depression treatment among people
with HIV in Uganda: a cluster-randomised trial. Lancet Glob Health
2020; 8: e387–98.
453 Saxena S, Thornicroft G, Knapp M, Whiteford H. Resources for
mental health: scarcity, inequity, and inefficiency. Lancet 2007;
370: 878–89.
454 Whiteford H, Ferrari A, Degenhardt L. Global burden of disease
studies: implications for mental and substance use disorders.
Health Aff 2016; 35: 1114–20.
455 WHO. Investing in mental health: evidence for action. Geneva:
World Health Organization, 2013.
456 Mental Health Commission of Canada. Making the case for
investing in mental health in Canada. Sept 2, 2013. https://www.
mentalhealthcommission.ca/wp-content/uploads/drupal/2016-06/
Investing_in_Mental_Health_FINAL_Version_ENG.pdf (accessed
July 3, 2024).
457 McDaid D, Hamilton M, King D, et al. An investment framework to
build mental capital in young people. https://www.orygen.org.au/
About/Orygen-Global/Files/Orygen-WEF-investment-framework
(accessed Nov 23, 2023).
458 Thokala P, Devlin N, Marsh K, et al. Multiple criteria decision
analysis for health care decision making—an introduction: report 1
of the ISPOR MCDA Emerging Good Practices Task Force.
Value Health 2016; 19: 1–13.

459 Vassall A, Mangham-Jefferies L, Gomez GB, Pitt C, Foster N.
Incorporating demand and supply constraints into economic
evaluations in low-income and middle-income countries.
Health Econ 2016; 25 (suppl 1): 95–115.
460 Luz A, Santatiwongchai B, Pattanaphesaj J, Teerawattananon Y.
Identifying priority technical and context-specific issues in
improving the conduct, reporting and use of health economic
evaluation in low- and middle-income countries.
Health Res Policy Syst 2018; 16: 4.
461 Furst MA, Gandré C, Romero López-Alberca C, Salvador-Carulla L.
Healthcare ecosystems research in mental health: a scoping review
of methods to describe the context of local care delivery.
BMC Health Serv Res 2019; 19: 173.
462 Patel V, Farmer PE. The moral case for global mental health
delivery. Lancet 2020; 395: 108–09.
463 Whiteford HA, Meurk C, Carstensen G, Hall W, Hill P, Head BW.
How did youth mental health make it onto Australia’s 2011 Federal
Policy Agenda? SAGE Open 2016; 6: 1–12.
464 Patterson AS, Boadu NY, Clark M, et al. Investigating global mental
health: contributions from political science. Glob Public Health
2020; 15: 805–17.
465 Haslam D. Side effects: how our healthcare lost its way and how we
fix it. London: Atlantic Books, 2022.
466 Scott IA, Duckett SJ. In search of professional consensus in
defining and reducing low-value care. Med J Aust 2015; 203: 179–81.
467 Gawande A. Being mortal: illness, medicine and what matters in
the end. London: Profile Books, 2014.
468 Long KM, Meadows GN. Simulation modelling in mental health:
a systematic review. J Simul 2018; 12: 76–85.
469 Jorm AF, Patten SB, Brugha TS, Mojtabai R. Has increased
provision of treatment reduced the prevalence of common mental
disorders? Review of the evidence from four countries.
World Psychiatry 2017; 16: 90–99.
470 Whiteford H, Bagheri N, Diminic S, et al. Mental health systems
modelling for evidence-informed service reform in Australia.
Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2023; 57: 1417–27.
471 Hamilton MP, Gao C, J Karnon, Salvador-Carulla L, Cotton SM,
Mihalopoulos C. Ethical considerations when planning,
implementing and releasing health economic model software:
a new proposal. arXiv 2024; published online March 25. https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.17798 (preprint).
472 Hamilton MP, Gao CX Wiesner G, et al. A prototype software
framework for transferable computational health economic models
and its early application in youth mental health. arXiv 2023; published
online Oct 22. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.14138 (preprint).
473 Halsall T, Manion I, Mathias S, et al. Frayme: building the structure
to support the international spread of integrated youth services.
Early Interv Psychiatry 2020; 14: 495–502.
474 Brinchmann B, Widding-Havneraas T, Modini M, et al. A metaregression of the impact of policy on the efficacy of individual
placement and support. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2020; 141: 206–20.
475 Park AL, Rinaldi M, Brinchmann B, et al. Economic analyses of
supported employment programmes for people with mental health
conditions: a systematic review. Eur Psychiatry 2022; 65: e51.
476 Bond GR, Al-Abdulmunem M, Marbacher J, Christensen TN,
Sveinsdottir V, Drake RE. A systematic review and meta-analysis of
IPS supported employment for young adults with mental health
conditions. Adm Policy Ment Health 2023; 50: 160–72.
477 Evans-Lacko S, Ribeiro W, Brietzke E, et al. Lean economies and
innovation in mental health systems. Lancet 2016; 387: 1356–58.
478 WHO. World health statistics 2016: monitoring health for the
SDGs, sustainable development goals. Geneva: World Health
Organization, 2016.
479 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Supporting young people’s mental health through the COVID-19
crisis. May 12, 2021. https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policyresponses/supporting-young-people-s-mental-health-through-thecovid-19-crisis-84e143e5/ (accessed Nov 23, 2023).
480 McGorry PD, Purcell R, Hickie IB, Jorm AF. Investing in youth
mental health is a best buy. Med J Aust 2007; 187: S5–7.
481 Tran K, Buchanan J, Song YJC, Rosenberg S, Occhipinti J-A,
Hickie IB. A Mental Wealth perspective: crossing disciplines to
understand the value of collective mental and social assets in the
post-COVID-19 era. Int J Ment Health Syst 2022; 16: 56.

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

773

The Lancet Psychiatry Commissions

482 Skinner A, Occhipinti J-A, Song YJC, Hickie IB. Population mental
health improves with increasing access to treatment: evidence from
a dynamic modelling analysis. BMC Psychiatry 2022; 22: 692.
483 UK Parliament. Children and young people’s mental health: eighth
report of session 2021–22. Dec 9, 2021. https://publications.
parliament.uk/pa/cm5802/cmselect/cmhealth/17/report.html
(accessed July 3, 2024).
484 Bronfenbrenner U. The ecology of human development.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1979.
485 Halsall T, Manion I, Henderson J. Examining integrated youth
services using the bioecological model: alignments and
opportunities. Int J Integr Care 2018; 18: 10.
486 Alegría M, NeMoyer A, Falgàs Bagué I, Wang Y, Alvarez K. Social
determinants of mental health: where we are and where we need to
go. Curr Psychiatry Rep 2018; 20: 95.
487 Campbell A. But what can I do? Why politics has gone so wrong,
and how you can help fix it. London: Penguin, 2023.
488 Timms H, Heimans J. New power: how it’s changing the 21st
century – and why you need to know. London: Pan Macmillan, 2018.
489 Patel V, Flisher AJ, Hetrick S, McGorry P. Mental health of young
people: a global public-health challenge. Lancet 2007; 369: 1302–13.
490 Bowman B, Bell K, Alexis-Martin B. Youth, climate and
environmentalism. In: Bell K, ed. Diversity and inclusion in
environmentalism. London: Routledge, 2021: 132–47.

774

491 Rees S, Silove D, Chey T, et al. Lifetime prevalence of gender-based
violence in women and the relationship with mental disorders and
psychosocial function. JAMA 2011; 306: 513–21.
492 Mezzina R, Gopikumar V, Jenkins J, Saraceno B, Sashidharan SP.
Social vulnerability and mental health inequalities in the
“syndemic”: call for action. Front Psychiatry 2022; 13: 894370.
493 Miller KE, Rasmussen A. The mental health of civilians displaced
by armed conflict: an ecological model of refugee distress.
Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci 2017; 26: 129–38.
494 Lavallee LF, Poole JM. Beyond recovery: colonization, health and
healing for indigenous people in Canada. Int J Ment Health Addict
2010; 8: 271–81.
495 Allen J, Balfour R, Bell R, Marmot M. Social determinants of
mental health. Int Rev Psychiatry 2014; 26: 392–407.
496 Tan KKH, Schmidt JM, Ellis SJ, Veale JF. Mental health of trans
and gender diverse people in Aotearoa/New Zealand: a review of
the social determinants of inequities. N Z J Psychol 2019;
48: 64–72.
Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved, including those for
text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

www.thelancet.com/psychiatry Vol 11 September 2024
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 10,
2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2025. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

